# Orientalism in Early Modern France

## IBSN: 978-1-84520-374-0

> Furs, silks and fi ne cottons, stimulants—tea, coffee, sugar, rum, gin, tobacco and spices  of all kinds—scrimshaw and curios for cabinets, travel books and atlases, topazes, feath- ers, orientalizing and Americanizing changes in clothing and ornament: these things did  not simply “improve the quality of life” in the metropole, they altered it, and altered the people who wore, ate, owned, contemplated, and changed their moods with them. “You are what you eat,” and Europe was cannibalizing the places and peoples that eventually made up its empires.1 --Mary Baine Campbell, Wonder and Science

One moment marks the inception of French imperial presence in Asia. In great se- crecy on April 12, 1798, the French Directory ordered the creation of the “Army of  the Orient,” naming Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) its commander in chief. On May 19 the French forces left Toulon, comprising 400 vessels, 50,000 men, over 1,000 pieces of artillery, 567 vehicles, 700 horses, and a slew of French scientists and artists, who were not apprised of their secret destination. The aims of the Egyptian invasion were not only to defeat the English and to establish a French empire in the  Mediterranean, but also to conduct a scientifi c survey of Egypt. Edward Saïd’s fa- mous book Orientalism begins with Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt. He argued thirty  years ago that empire and orientalist science went hand in hand. The mission of the Armée d’Orient’s orientalists and scientists was to study Egypt to advance French  knowledge of the world. Most of the orientalists who accompanied the French expe- dition were the students of one man, Sylvestre de Sacy (1758–1838), a man closely  studied by Edward Saïd in Orientalism.2

In October 1798, as French cannons were shelling the Al Ahzar mosque, Joseph Marcel risked the fl ames to rescue some invaluable Quranic texts.3  After the end of the  expedition, he was appointed director of the Imprimerie nationale in Paris where he as- sisted with the publishing of the multivolume Description of Egypt. Silvestre de Sacy  and his many students were of great service to France’s imperial project and were re- warded with peerages and government posts. This well-known Napoleonic expedition  to Egypt, and its resulting scientifi c survey, were the products of very long-held French imperial hopes. The earlier history of French Orientalism is less well known.4 This book is as much about the orientalizing of France and the French accumulation and consumption of oriental goods as it is about Orientalism in France. It ends with
