been modern: “Seen as networks ... the modern world, like revolutions, permits scarcely anything more than small extensions of practices, slight acceleration in the  circulation of knowledge, a tiny extension of society, minuscule increase in the num- ber of actors, small modifi cation of old beliefs.”35 The way Orientalism has been  studied is linked to modernity, to conquest, and to imperialism. Modernity linked power and knowledge together in the monism invented by Hobbes, borrowed by Foucault, and used by Edward Saïd and many others in his footsteps. This view itself is a modern construct in which we all participate.

Bruno Latour sees that we are only beginning to critique modernity now as we are hoping to escape from its consequences of global warming, ecological disasters, and genetically modifi ed foods that bring modernization under criticism. Before Hobbes and Boyle wrote out the contract that defi ned the modern world, and eventually made us view the sciences as distinct from the humanities, how was knowledge utilized?  How was knowledge linked to power? Was the knowledge gathered by French sci- entists and travelers used by those in power? Did the court and its institutions use  scientifi c knowledge under Louis XIV when the French Academy of Science was born? This book has no pretension to uncover how modernity was built in France, but it hopes to uncover the role of travel and Orientalism in building that modernity  through transforming both France’s political and scientifi c institutions and its pat- terns of consumption. This book argues in Chapters 1, 4, and 8 that Orientalism was  at the inception of the Collège de France, and of the Academy of Sciences. The world before modernity and after it has been described as another world:

> When we see them as networks, Western innovations remain recognizable and impor- tant, but they no longer suffi ce as the stuff of saga, the vast saga of radical rupture,  fatal destiny, irreversible good or bad fortune. The antimoderns, like the postmoderns have accepted their adversaries’ playing fi eld; another fi eld—much broader much less polemical—has opened up before us: the fi eld of nonmodern worlds, it is the middle kingdom as vast as China and as little known.36

Latour falls in the trap of modernity, seeing the nonmodern as a foreign country. Many preceded him in looking for Europe’s past across the world, or better still for paradise lost. This was the legacy of modern social science built up slowly after Early Modern exploration: the primitive, the other without modern ideas or modern tools to transform his world. Latour argues that until recently, modern Europeans felt invincible, that only now in the face of a world invaded by “frozen embryos, expert systems, digital machines, censor equipped robots, hybrid corn ... when our daily news papers display all these monsters on page after page and when none of these chimera can be properly on the object side or the subject side.”37 Who would divide science and social politics today? Universities still do. Yet, the binary order of things established in the modern period is daily questioned by contemporary reality.
