Anquetil Duperron, the man Saïd considered to be the fi rst orientalist.5  The book ends where Edward Saïd’s book began, with the imperial age, the invasion of Egypt.

The history of French orientalism starts after the very fi rst French diplomatic rela- tions with the Ottomans, established by a letter that traveled hidden in a boot in 1526  under Francis I. The Egyptian invasion itself had an older history, a textual one. As early as 1672, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) traveled to meet Louis XIV (1638–1715) and present him with his pamphlet titled Thoughts on Public Safety, which argued for an invasion of Egypt. Leibniz contended that the states of Europe should not fi ght each other, but conquer the Muslim world. In Leibniz’s plan of global conquest, Egypt was the fi rst stage in the domination of the Muslim world. According to his plan, the rule of Egypt should fall to France and make France the mistress of the Mediterranean; Egypt was the cornerstone of a French empire and crucial for the control of a route to India. Leibniz had depicted Egypt variously as the “eye of countries,” the “mother of grain,” the “seat of commerce.”6  Attacking the Ot- tomans would have spared the German provinces from French aggression. A century  later, in 1769, Louis XV (1710–1774) was approached by the Duc de Choiseul, who argued against continuing the costly French colonial efforts in North America and recommended the conquest of Egypt in its stead. As a consequence of de Choiseul’s policies, during the last decades of the eighteenth century, even as a revolution took place in the American colonies and then later in France, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was inundated with reports and accounts from Egypt by French travelers, merchants, and consular agents.

A few years later, in 1777, Baron de Tott was sent by the Foreign Offi ce on a se- cret mission to explore the advantages of securing Egypt as a French colony. He was  accompanied by several specialists, including Sonnini de Manincourt, a naturalist who wrote his own travel account.7  Such examples make the relationship between imperialism and travel and Orientalism clear, as Saïd has long argued. However,  until the late seventeenth century such direct links between policy and travel ac- counts were not as common, nor always as overt. The birth of French Orientalism was  a long and complex process that was not always directly commissioned, fi nanced, or  even instigated by the French court. Did this mean that early Orientalism was not im- perial? A scrutiny of Orientalism’s early days answers this question in Chapters 1, 2,  and 3 by exploring how it was sponsored and what transformations of knowledge it produced in France. This is a book about France. Early Orientalisms had an immense impact on French culture and on French institutions, not on the “Orient.”8 It is argued here that if the Orient was an object of study, it was France that was the subject of transformations. France shaped itself while engaging with the rest of the world.

Upon Louis XIV’s long-awaited birth on September 5, 1638, the famous astrolo- ger Campanella predicted that Louis XIV would grow to be the hero anticipated by  the mystic Abbot Joachim of Fiore, the solar hero who would at last eliminate the Muslim anti-Christ from the face of the earth.9  This is often a predictable cliché in discussing Islam and France. Yet, this was predicted of a monarch who succeeded
