a line of kings allied to the mightiest of Muslim rulers, the Sultan. Since Francis I, the French were the main European allies of the powerful Ottomans, enemies of the  Hapsburgs who loomed large on the borders of Europe. The concept of Gallia Orien- talis, Louis’s dream of empire in Asia, was based on the belief that it was his duty to  reconquer Charlemagne’s empire and to extend it, and he fought the Hapsburgs for the title of emperor.10 Louis also wanted to convert everyone in the world, including  the king of Siam, to Catholicism. There was a large difference between this predict- able, deep-rooted, and rather repetitious imperial discourse, and actual policy. This  makes it all the more important to study Orientalism within its historical context, as  the gap between discourse and reality was often a vast one. While discussing cru- sades, as his predecessors had done for over six centuries, everything was done to  maintain France’s friendship with the Ottomans for the merchants of Marseilles.

Most of France’s trade depended on the Levant markets. It is stressed here that the Normans ran the Atlantic trade and the Provençeaux ran the Levant trade, quite independently from the court. France’s Eurasian trade grew exponentially during Louis’s reign. The merchants of Marseilles were instrumental. Antoine Galland and  many other orientalists were all attached to diplomatic missions funded by the mer- chants of Marseilles, not by the court. The king’s discourse was just one among  many. The fi rst three chapters examine France’s contacts with the world and some of the writing it produced, while Chapter 4 concentrates on the creations of institutions under Louis to gather, control, and classify the writing produced by French travelers. It highlights the role of Orientalism in the birth of science and in the creation of the French Academy of Sciences.

Antoine Galland in his Paroles remarquables, bon mots et maxims remarquables des Orienteaux wrote: “[U]nder the name oriental I do not only mean the Arabs and the Persians, but the Turks and the Tartars and nearly all of the peoples of Asia all the way to China, be they Muslims, pagans or idol worshipers.”11 Additionally the Americas were often confl ated with Asia. The French term les Indes referred to both, and despite the adjectives of orientales and occidentales, there was often a fusion of Asia and the Americas in French views. A crucial shift took place over the century. In the 1606 Nicot dictionary, orient only denoted where the sun rises. In 1694 in the fi rst dictionary of the Académie française it becomes geographically defi ned: Orient, Se prend aussi pour les Estats, les Provinces de la grande Asie, comme l’Empire  du Mogol, le Royaume de Siam, de la Chine, &c. Les regions de l’orient. les Peu- ples d’orient. les Princes d’orient. voyager en orient. cela vient d’orient. des perles  d’orient. une agate d’orient.12 Even the defi nition pointed to oriental goods, pearls,  and agates. Orientalism was closely tied to Eurasian trade, and this is how it is stud- ied here, through merchants, travelers and diplomats. The fi st fi ve chapters argue in  different ways that France’s trade relations were closely tied to this very diverse and often contradictory textual production.

Chapter 5 concentrates on the Huguenots and their importance as sailors, mer- chants, and explorers. The role of the Huguenots is alluded to in Chapter 3 and is
