studied more closely in Chapters 4 and 5 as their role in Louis’s navy and his over- seas ambitions was crucial and has often been overlooked. Several very important  French merchants were Protestants and were among the chief purveyors of exotic goods to court. The most striking case was Louis’s new and unsurpassed diamond collection brought from India. Exotic goods solicited a discourse that was both social and economic in nature as they transformed daily life and also had a concrete impact  on French society. From Asia came the many exotic luxury goods such as silk, cot- ton, coffee, tea, china, gems, furniture, fl owers, lacquer, and paper, all of which al- tered daily life and transformed French society and culture. From Chapter 6 through  10, these material transformations, the discourse about them, and the epistemologi- cal consequences of exotic goods are explored. Not only did these imports change  material life, but the travel accounts written by French merchants, missionaries, and diplomats involved in the trade had a tremendous cultural and political impact on the social structures of French society and how it viewed itself.

It is these views, about what was French and what was foreign, that metamor- phosed the exotic goods of earlier centuries into what the French considered national  goods by the end of the eighteenth century. Exotic is used here as a category, as meaning outside of things French; exotisme and its adjective was not part of the French vocabulary until 1845, as it was largely a nineteenth-century phenomenon. How a foreign, exotic good was naturalized is the object of Chapters 6, 7, and 8. A striking example of this transformation is the creation of the café as public space in imitation of the coffee houses in Cairo, Istanbul, and Isfahan. Today the café is seen as a Parisian institution, and coffee is seen as a national drink by the French, its oriental roots forgotten. This cycle of cultural integration was the fate of many luxury goods imported from Asia. This is historicizing objects and commodities. Bruno Latour wrote best about the dilemma that arises when studying the reception of objects in society:

> Social scientists have for long allowed themselves to denounce the belief systems of ordinary people. They call the belief system “naturalyzation” (Bourdieu and Wacquant,  1992). Ordinary people imagine that the power of gods, the objectivity of money, the at- traction of fashion, the beauty of art, come from some objective properties intrinsic to the  nature of things, fortunately social scientists know better and they show that the arrow  goes in fact in the other direction, from society to the objects ... To become a social sci- entist is to realize that the inner properties of objects do not count. That they are a mere  receptacle for human categories.13

In studying the exotic and its reception in France, one studies perceptions, not the exotic. Through contact with the exotic an interest in categorizing of the domestic arose; the clearest example is herbalism, later called botany, explored in Chapters 4 and 8, which partly rely on the work of historians of science such as Paula Findlen and Londa Schiefi nger.
