What was exotic or domestic was an intellectual construct that had little to do with reality. Some domestic products were still perceived as exotic, and vice versa. This is true intellectually as well. Slavery existed in France, but it was silenced and  seen as exotic to France and impossible on French soil. Another case in point is ori- ental despotism, a notion present in Greek texts. There was a similar naturalizing in  the political cycle that moved from identifying despotism with the oriental “other” to  the despotism within in eighteenth-century France, noticed by many scholars work- ing on literature. As importantly, Orientalism also shaped economic writing, much of  it concentrating on luxury, once seen as oriental and tied to despotism, as examined  in Chapter 10. Luxury was viewed as a marker of class within France, as it was else- where, until the Revolution discourse tied it exclusively to the French monarchy  and aristocracy. In the discussions on luxury the Orient was a point of reference. Beyond luxury, through comparison, a whole political system was being gauged. China loomed large in the thought of the famous French physiocrats, while Persia and the Persian kings as oriental despots infuse French political philosophy from  Jean Bodin (1529–1596) to Montesquieu to the Abbé Raynal. A dominant issue be- fore the French revolution, as France’s economic defi cit became clear, was the battle  between the physiocrats and a group of bankers around Necker (1732–1804) who argued for more investment and for speculation in the French overseas commercial trade companies. The last chapter, Chapter 10, picks up this discussion, begun in Chapter 2 with Bodin’s views on oriental despotism.

Through Louis XIV’s personal efforts Paris became the fashion capital of the world, a center for luxury goods. Paris outmoded Spanish dress in Europe. Louis set the example of wearing shimmering brocades, colorful silks, enormous ostrich  plumes, diamonds, and high-heeled shoes. He set a fl amboyant example that he re- quired to be imitated by the courtesans at Versailles, who in turn were imitated by  others. There is little question that it was through cooks and coiffeurs that the court  of France exercised its cultural imperialism on Europe’s elites.14 Famously, Nor- bert Elias has argued that the extravagant expenses of life at Versailles, including  the costumed balls where aristocrats dressed as Turks, Persians, and Moors, were a matter of establishing political control. He argued that Louis used fashion and the extravagant consumption it imposed as a tool of political submission. It is argued here that, ironically, endorsing oriental sartorial splendor at court gave rise to the creation of “Frenchness” through fashion, which became an umbrella defi nition that  broke through the class barriers. It can be argued that social mobility was the great- est factor in increased consumption. Social mobility was a matter of policy, as merit  was rewarded beyond the aristocracy. Louis gave titles of nobility to many merchant families. Display became a mark of rank. Chapter 8 examines the role of merchants and artisans amending the Elias model, while Chapter 9 concentrates on fashion and display at court as it pertains to Orientalism.

French fashion, as constructed by Louis, also profi ted the French silk industry. Colbert reformed an ineffi cient silk industry that had existed since Francis I to turn
