it into a major one.15 The silk manufacturers of Lyons produced for the new French fashion, making the brightly colored striped and fl owered silks imposed by Louis on his court, and in turn on the rest of Europe’s elite. France went from an importer of silk textiles to become an exporter. It exported over 30,000 pounds sterling worth of French silk to England in 1674 alone.16 Nevertheless, recent scholarship has rightly  moved away from a totally court-centered view of consumption. Merchants and mar- kets, and their mechanisms, are correctly seen as central in transforming demand.  Scientists and artisans also had a central role in taming the exotic and shaping it, as Chapter 8 discusses. Yet, court policy, sumptuary laws, imports, mercantilism (and its demand for imitation), and built-up domestic productions in expectation of bans against imports were still central. When and how modern consumption was created is the subject of much debate and disagreement among scholars, but the range was within the early modern period; the sixteenth century at the earliest, the eighteenth at the latest.17

Carolyn Weber’s new book on the woman who was called “Madame défi cite,” Marie Antoinette, was a tremendous boon. The book closes with a few moments spent with the “foreign queen,” guilty of using exotic foreign goods. A decade or two before the French Revolution, the mood had turned protectionist, xenophobic, and nationalistic by all accounts. Foreign goods, foreigners, and foreign ways were publicly reviled, and Chapter 10 argues for a longer history of this discourse. Marie Antoinette and her abandonment of the French court dress and its silken sartorial splendor was seen as causing the economic distress of France.18 It is argued here that resistance to things foreign had a very long history in France’s political economy.

While the process of Westernization and resistance to it in the Middle East, espe- cially in the nineteenth century, has long attracted the attention of scholars, there is  scant literature on the adoption of oriental goods, manners, fashions, techniques, and  modes of thinking by European society. The orientalization of France and the resis- tance to it deserve study. This is just a beginning, as the material is vast. Here only a  few examples were chosen. The custom of drinking coffee was imported via Cairo, the Ottoman empire’s chief marketplace. These manners were of course transformed by European adoption, yielding a myriad of hybrid cultural customs that arose in that age of archaic globalism. These new beverages are only the most striking and evident examples of many goods that had an effect on French manners, daily life, economic policy, trade, and industry. Their adoption and integration apparently speaks of a cosmopolitan society open to change, yet there is a whole discourse of resistance to the exotic to study. Looking at the adoption of new goods by the French helps diffuse the binary model used in many works on Orientalism, and already amended by Homi Bhahba’s views on “hybridization” and by Marie Louise Pratt’s “contact zones.”19 Latour’s work adds the very useful view of networks and hybrids, well suited for studying the Early Modern period.

A few good books look at French Orientalism in the arts and in literature, cen- tered on France looking at the “other” through theater or painting, but not on the
