transformations within French society instigated by these contacts.20 Closest to the focus of this book are the works of Madeleine Dobie and Michèle Longino, although  they are concerned with the literary. Nothing has been written on the material trans- formations that occurred in French daily habits by the adoption of some oriental  customs, with the notable exception of a small passage in Madeleine Dobie’s book about orientalist literature containing a fascinating mention in passing about how  furniture and chairs transformed by Ottoman models might have changed body pos- ture, as sofas and ottomans were adapted and adopted in France.21 In Furnishing  the Eighteenth Century, Dobie has continued to look at stylistic transformations in furniture.22 Stylistic change and imitation is another way Orientalism has been well studied. In this category the taste for chinoiserie has the largest literature devoted to it. Most works are on the eighteenth or nineteenth century, with the exception of Michèle Longino’s study of Orientalism in French theater in the seventeenth century. It is an exceptional study, as it ties literary production and historical circumstances.23 Another very relevant work on the seventeenth century is Dominique Carnoy’s work on the representation of Islam in France.24

Contrary to the impact of the Ottomans on Europe, the impact of France on the Ottomans and their tastes has been well explored: Fatma Muge Göcek has studied the effects that this encounter produced on Istanbul and on Ottoman customs and  views.25 Here it is argued that Paris was just as affected, if not more so, and trans- formed by its contact with Asia and the Americas. Both were seen as the Orient,  and both were labeled les Indes, even as there was a clear division in the seven- teenth century between les Indes orientales for Asia and les Indes occidentales for  the Americas; the confusion existed even in the eighteenth century. This is one of the issues explored throughout the book. For France the effect of contact with les Indes has been presented as textual and stylistic but not transformative. Perhaps because of the European view that progress belonged to Christianity and to Europe alone after the Age of Exploration, in the wake of Europe’s very successful expansion and colonialism, there has been some reluctance to give the Orient, save for China, any agency in transforming Early Modern Europe.26

Yet, there was a dialogue in the exchanges between Asia and Europe. Even as Europe started dreaming of empire, it was integrating the world it lusted after into its own domestic sphere. It did this through the accumulation that characterized early capitalism: cabinets of curiosities, collections of objects, books, manuscripts, and exotic plants and fl owers. These goods brought not only epistemological innovation, but orientalized Europeans and changed their consumption habits. The second part of this book examines these material changes. New consumption habits created demand, which in turn brought technological innovation to create imitations and new industries within France. The collection of exotic plants and animals marked the birth of zoology and herbalism, later called botany. France’s exchanges with the Orient produced profound socioeconomic and intellectual changes. Of all the new oriental goods, the one that had the largest impact and was chosen for study in
