this book—coffee consumption—brought on innovations in social institutions and medicine. But all of these new goods and information collected in travel books had  the largest impact on the birth of sciences in France, despite resistance from the Sor- bonne, as explored in Chapters 1, 2, and 4.

How to plant a tulip or sip a cup of coffee became part of the vocabulary of daily life in France. Contacts with other societies stimulated a whole discourse around new goods. This study of the transformation of French material, intellectual, and cultural life is infl uenced by recent scholarship on patterns of consumption.27 Eurasian trade is explored for its cultural, material, and intellectual ramifi cations in Early Modern France. With one look at the scant scholarship there is on the effects of Orientalism or oriental goods on Venice, Antwerp, the Portuguese, and the Dutch, one realizes that this silence is not unique to France.28

There is an inspiring precedent for analyzing the Ottoman empire’s impact on European material life. Lisa Jardine’s Worldly Goods successfully challenges a  monolithic view of European life by integrating knowledge about the Ottoman em- pire through the work of scholars such as Gülru Necipoglu.29 Previously held ideas  about the East and West have been dismantled in some important corrective efforts for the sixteenth century: the works of Kim Hall for England, of Jerry Brotton for the Portuguese, and the well-known contributions of Lisa Jardine bring a global view of the Renaissance.30 Lisa Jardine and Jerry Brotton have also dissolved the alien exotic “other” in the same breadth as they have dismantled clichés of the Renaissance man.31 Mary Campbell’s book Wonder and Science breaks disciplinary boundaries in every sense, reminding us that the disciplines did not exist then. This book hopes to express the same spirit of exchange and dialogue between cultures and disciplines.32

In contrast to Eurasian trade, the literature on production and trade, and on slavery and plantation life at this later stage of European exchange with the New World is too vast to cite in this introduction; it highlights European expansion and is readily studied. Europe’s taste for exotic goods was not only at the root of Europe’s colonial plantations, but of many new manufactures that imitated foreign luxury goods and strived to produce them domestically. Many of these innovations and imitations were in textiles and were at the root of a proto-industrial revolution. Many travelers were sent to study, or less politely put, spy on manufacturing techniques in Persia, India, and China and report home. The oldest effort of imitating oriental goods in France began as a fascinating experiment that involved planting mulberry trees in the garden of the Tuileries palace under Henri IV. Manufactures, gardens, shops, public spaces, guilds and their organization, economic theories, and philosophical writings were all deeply affected by the commercial exchanges that France had with Asia. Each aspect would demand a book of its own.

The main sources used here are travel accounts combined with some archival sources and with many secondary works on France. The many secondary sources by historians of France that helped me along the way are acknowledged in the notes. French travel accounts have attracted the attention of major literary scholars;
