François Moureau, Dirk Van der Cruysse, and Frank Lestringant are leaders among a group of researchers that have unearthed and studied many forgotten texts at the Centre de recherché sur la literature des voyages at Paris IV, Sorbonne. Based on Boucher de la Richarderie’s Bibliothèque universelle des voyages, compiled in the nineteenth century, Daniel Roche gives us the prodigious number of travel accounts produced in Europe in the Early Modern period. The accounts that appear in the repertory made by the Bibliothèque universelle are numbered at a total of 5,562. For the sixteenth century, one counts only 456 travel accounts in European languages and 1,566 in the seventeenth, then 3,540 for the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth century.33 The numbers alone speak of the growing engagement of Europe with the rest of the world. This was not a space where I could linger on an account, nor create a complete list of them. I attempted to choose relevant travelers to look at their networks. Famous travelers are often viewed alone, in a heroic tradition, but they were part of a network of exchange that was all-important to the birth of science in France. Chapter 4 concentrates on the birth of the French Academy of Sciences and its links to travel and Orientalism. One cannot write about France alone, as nôtre Europe, our Europe, is a concept found constantly under the pen of French travelers to Asia.34 The network of exchange between travelers was European.

I have tried to keep the freedom of spirit to think simultaneously of some of the multitude of concrete transformations that occurred in Early Modern Europe and of the desires and hopes and dreams that were not always directly tied to any real results.  For French commerce in Asia the latter category is prodigiously large. This is a dis- continuous history, one punctuated by accident and interruption, and as far as policy  and discourse goes, one fi nds at least two voices if not more. Nevertheless, if most of the French court’s ventures in Asia were miserable failures, they had immense cultural consequences domestically. Much of the court’s discourse about its role in the world was about how it was destined to rule it, while policy did not follow this  agenda. This book considers discourse, stated policy, and action on the terrain cap- tured at different moments. Beyond the court, there were many other voices writing  about the Orient: merchants, doctors, jewelers, and adventurers. The court did, how- ever, consider them informants, once it got organized to do so. Was the information  collected used? If so, how? Did this collection serve imperial aims? Did it ever help any imperial projects that took into account the observations sent in by travelers? Was there any true utility in writing about Asia? Did the travelers themselves participate in any imperial hopes? These may not be the right questions, but they are summoned by the word Orientalism, now marked by Saïd’s defi nition of it since 1978.

Early Orientalism was shaped by a multitude of voices writing about les Indes, and they are full of contradictions. They slowly built up the modern dichotomy so well described by Latour as the divide between culture and nature, between science and society. The quarrels between the ancients and moderns was apparently won by the moderns. The travelers, many of them doctors, in this book are the moderns, building a new worldview as observers. According to Bruno Latour, we have never
