# Palamas: Triads
## ISBN:0-8091-2447-5
> It should be remembered that no evil thing is evil insofar as it exists, but insofar as it is turned aside from the activity appropriate to it, and thus from the end assigned to this activity. +pp27

Where Proclus is said to have noted the angels as guided by the one and their role in steering daemonea, we may find resonance with Palamas insight that evil is to turn away from appropriate activity. Demons in the negative connation must be understood like cancer: the differentiation of the error-in-the-world is no longer guided towards immanent univocity

> Is there then anything of use to us in this philosophy? Certainly. For just as there is much therapeutic value even in substances obtained from the flesh of serpents, and the doctors consider there is no better and more useful medicine than that derived from this source, so there is something of benefit to be had even from the profane philosophers - but somewhat as in a mixture of honey and hemlock. +pp28

For me, the Flesh of Serpents signals Chemical Ecology, a tapestry of relations that hangs in a gentle balance. I begin to imagine non-determinstic chaos and dynamical systems theory with applications to biochemistry. Philosophy is like a strange interaction partner that can carry the system of thought to a subdomain of the manifold of Being where it was previously veiled, but in every measurement comes a collapse such that Absolute Knowledge slips endlessly from ones grasp. Slippery like a basic solution, philosophy at once cleans yet washes away. Yet to treat the skin with chemicals all too often reorganizes the chemical ecology thereof.

> you must separate out useless ideas by means of the faculties of examination and inspection possessed by the soul, just as pharmacists purify the flesh of serpents with fire and water. Even if you do all this, and make good use of what has been properly set aside, how much trouble and circumspection will be required for the task! +pp28

The pharmacist applies heat and water in order tp bring about transformation in the composition of the system at hand. Species are destroyed, or rather sublated via Aufheben, especially in those cases where a species suspended may return via the appropriate fluctuation embedded with the virtal scaffold cascading through and with the Act of Being. Food uncooked may sicken, and a sysyem not transformed enough can leak ever increasing disorder and error in the world that does not map to an action-perception loop towards tension management. This becomes a question of regulation and the imposition of attractors after sustaining the untyped lambdas generated in the univocity of Being.

> As to natural wisdom, it is said that even Adam possessed it in abundance, more so than all his descendents, although he was the first who failed to safeguard conformity to the image. Profane philosophy existed as an aid to this natural wisdom before the advent of Him who came to recall the soul to its ancient beauty: Why then were we not renewed by this philosophy before Christ's coming? Why did we need, not someone to teach us philosophy — an art which passes away with this age, so that it is said to be "of this age" — but One "who takes away the sin of the world", and who grants us a true and eternal wisdom—even though this appears as "foolishness" to the ephemeral and corrupt wise men of this world, whereas in reality its absence makes truly foolish those not spiritually attached to it? Do you not clearly see that it is not the study of profane sciences which brings salvation, which purifies the cognitive faculty of the soul, and conforms it to the divine Archetype? +pp30

Under Jewish Intertestamental Apocolypticsm as demonstrated in the books of Enoch, it was the stain of the Reactionary Angels that set about the movement of Sin. Sin is error, divergence from the Univocity of Being and the acts hidden within this dark pregenitor of untyped lambdas. Knowledge of Nature is seen as total, and it decays as Warfare Rattles the Divine Oikonomia. This intigates constant searches for knowledge that has already been. Ensnared by the Reactionary Angels, the technocrat envisions the future in a way that Erodes the Splendor of the Apophantic Rays and dissolves the integrity of person to person and the trust they forge. Having lost each other, the sin of the technocrat reveals only Nature to be dominated by calculation. Soon, numbers become more real than people, and so the Trains run on Schedule after the boarding schools sought to spread that civilization of technique and the progeny proliferated for patrinlineal property. The New Organon has met with Stochastic Process Theory, and the Census is counting.
