# The Philosophy of Samkhya

## Preliminary Remarks

Although the main outlines of the history and literature of Samkhya are reasonably clear, the same cannot be said about the details of the system qua philosophical system. As was mentioned in the last chapter, there appears to have been a break in the Samkhya textual tradition  at an early date. Beginning with I svarakrsna's Samkhyakarika and there- after, there are only summaries and digests of the system, and many  of the commentators are almost as much at a loss to explain the full system as is a modern interpreter. This is unfortunate, for in many ways the evidence suggests that Samkhya philosophy stands at the fountainhead of systematic Indian reflection, somewhat on analogy with Pythagoreanism and other pre-Socratic systems in ancient Greece. As is well known, the influence of Samkhya is ubiquitous in South  Asian cultural life, not only in philosophy but in medicine, law, state- craft, mythology, cosmology, theology, and devotional literature.  Samkhya was evidently a direct descendent of older and unsystematic  Upanisadic speculation, a precursor of much of India's scientific lite- rature and an older sibling of the first philosophical efforts in South  Asia (including Jain, Buddhist, Vaisesika, Mimamsa, and Yoga tradi- tions ).

To be sure, certain characteristic philosophical notions are conti- nually attributed to Samkhya in the history of Indian philosophy—  for example, the dualism of consciousness and materiality (purusa and prakrti), the guna theory, the theory that the effect preexists in the cause in a potential state (satkaryavada), the plurality of puruxas, and so forth—  but there is a notable absence of the larger conceptual and specula- tive framework from which these characteristic Samkhya notions are  derived, and more than that, an absence of any firm sense that these so-called characteristic notions were, in fact, central within the Sam-
khya tradition itself. Regarding this latter point, one has the impression that many of the characteristic notions of Samkhya were central largely to the later issues in Indian philosophy and were probably much  less prominent within the original Samkhya speculative environ- ment. In other words, later commentators were interrogating  Samkhya philosophy from the perspective of their own philosophical agendas—for example, Nyaya argumentation, Buddhist logic, Vedanta  metaphysics, and so forth—and were simply uninterested in, or un- aware of, Samkhya's own speculative agenda. K. G. Bhattacharya has  expressed the matter well:

> Much of Samkhya literature appears to have been lost, and there seems to be no continuity of tradition from ancient times up to the age of the commentators. In such systematic works as we have, one  seems to have a hazy view of a grand system of speculative meta- physics.... The interpretation of all ancient systems requires a  constructive effort; but while in the case of some systems where we have a large volume of literature and a continuity of tradition, the construction is mainly of the nature of translation of ideas in to modern concepts, here in Samkhya the construction at many places involves supplying of missing links from one's imagination. It is risky work, but unless one does it one cannot be said to understand  Samkhya as a philosophy. It is a task that one is obliged to under- take. It is a fascinating task because Samkhya is a bold, construc- tive philosophy.1 

The Samkhya system qua system, then, is an interesting lacuna in our understanding of ancient India's first systematic philosophizing, an intriguing intellectual puzzle that requires a "constructive effort" (to use K. C. Bhattacharya's idiom) in order to piece it together, but a puzzle that if even partly unscrambled could provide many valuable perspectives for the cultural historian, the historian of philosophy, and the pure philosopher. For the cultural historian, a fuller grasp of Samkhya could possibly provide improved interpretive perspectives for understanding the complex symbol systems that underlie so much of Indian religion, art, law, mythology, and medical theorizing. For the historian of Indian philosophy, a fuller grasp of the Samkhya system could possibly provide a sharper awareness of the network of archaic notions and values that launched many of the first systematic reflections in Indian philosophy. For the pure philosopher, a fuller grasp of the Samkhya system could possibly provide a better grasp of that set of primordial intuitions by means of which South Asians first addressed questions about being, nonbeing, change, causation, and so forth, in a systematic way—a SouthAsian surrogate, as it were, for a context of primordial philosophizing that thinkers such as Heideg-
ger have pursued among the pre-Socratic traditions of the Western philosophical tradition.

In any case, the task of discussing Samkhya as a philosophical system  involves a good deal more than historical research, philological investi- gation, and comparison and contrast with the agenda items of classical  Indian philosophy, though, of course, such conventional approaches  are a prerequisite for reaching the threshold of the system. Historical re- search provides some helpful bits and pieces of the puzzle, glimpses, and  hints of how the Samkhya methodology of enumeration slowly emerged into a conceptual system, even though the final system qua system is nowhere fully exposed in an extant text in other than a summary fashion. Philological work takes one a bit further, helping to determine the relevant set of technical terms and providing some sense of which lists and enumerations are more important than others. The Samkhya texts, however, are largely laconic lists, and the later commentators are remarkably unhelpful in explaining the relevance or meaning of  the various lists (and, in this sense, notably unlike the later commen- tators on the other systems of classical Indian philosophy). Further  progress can be made by examining the manner in which Samkhya is criticized in laterphilosophical traditions—for example, byDignaga, Jinendrabuddhi, Mallavadin, Simhasuri, Samkara, Ramanuja, and so forth — but as was mentioned earlier this later agenda of Indian  philosophy has moved considerably beyond the older Samkhya specu- lative environment. Moreover, there remains not a single Samkhya  rejoinder to these ripostes by Samkhya's opponents — with the possible exception of the Yuktidipika, which is clearly a Samkhya polemic vis-a-vis Buddhist and Naiyayika critiques of Samkhya. Samkhya's role in the history of classical Indian philosophy is comparable, mutatis  mutandis, to that of Garvaka materialism, that is to say, a sort of philo- sophical "whipping boy" abused by all but never allowed to respond —  or to shift metaphors, an intellectual "paper tiger" seldom taken seriously but providing a convenient point of departure for doing other things.

In discussing Samkhya philosophy, then, after one has pursued his- torical work as far as possible, after one has read all of the extant texts,  and after one has studied all of the criticisms of Samkhya in the larger classical philosophical literature, one has only attained what K. C. Bhattacharya has aptly called "... a hazy view of a grand system of speculative metaphysics." To sharpen the view, the interpreter must engage in " . . . supplying of missing links from one's imagination." This cannot mean, of course, inventing notions or projecting a favored perspective on the evidence that is unwarranted. The "supplying of missing links from one's imagination" means, rather, searching for relations, bundles of relations, and possible interpretive perspectives that may not be directly expressed in the texts but that bring together
the various Samkhya enumerations into more coherent patterns.

To some extent, of course, the textual tradition itself offers some halt- ing steps in this direction. The Tuktidipika, for example, offers several  intriguing interpretations that provide a larger view of the Samkhya system as a whole, certainly more so than the Karika itself and all of its  other commentaries. Similarly, Bhavaganesa in his TattvayathSrthya- dipana (on the Tattvasamasa) provides a "constructive effort" in Bhatta- charya's sense, as does Vijnanabhiksu in his Samkhyapravacanabhasya,  although both of them, unfortunately, Vedanticize Samkhya more than would seem warranted. Such efforts are important, however, in providing helpful clues about the manner in which the indigenous philosophical tradition interpreted the old Samkhya system, as well  as in warning against the dangers of bias, excessive polemic, and ana- chronism in any constructive undertaking.

Among modern scholarly "constructive efforts" (apart, of course, from the standard summaries of Samkhya that one finds in numerous textbooks), one can identify four distinct approaches to reconstructing the Samkhya system, namely, those of Richard Garbe, Surendranath  Dasgupta, Erich Frauwallner, and K. C. Bhattacharya.2 Garbe cons- trues the old Samkhya system as primarily an ancient philosophy of  nature, a unique system that must have been the product of a single  mind (either Kapila or Pancasikha) in ancient times. There is, there- fore, neither a "preclassical Samkhya" nor a postclassical Samkhya.  There is one ancient system, and one can range freely throughout the entire scope of Samkhya literature in reconstructing that system.3  Surendranath Dasgupta approaches his construction from the oppo- site direction. The old Samkhya-Yoga texts are notoriously difficult  to interpret, and it is only with Vijnanabhiksu in his Samkhyapravacana- bhasya (in the medieval period) that one reaches a firm basis for piecing  together the contours of the Samkhya system as a whole. The key notions of the system, therefore, are presented through the interpretive  perspective of Vijnanabhiksu's Vedantin metaphysics.4 Erich Frau- wallner (following the anti-Garbe polemic of Hermann Oldenberg)  focuses primarily on Samkhya as an important position in the history of epistemological discussions within Indian philosophy. Frauwallner construes Samkhya's philosophy of nature as deriving largely from Pancasikha with its epistemological giounding given by Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin. Isvarakrsna's Karika is only a later summary of the system and fails to provide an adequate account of the old Samkhya epistemology, which, therefore, must be reconstructed from other  sources. Frauwallner relies heavily on the Tuktidipika in his construc- tion of the final Samkhya system and reconstructs Samkhya cosmology  from the old Puranas.5 Finally, K. G. Bhattacharya construes the Samkhya system as a bold "philosophy of the subject" that is ". . . based on speculative insight" and that "... demands imaginative-
introspective effort at every stage on the part of the interpreter."  Like Dasgupta, Bhattacharya relies heavily on Vijnanabhiksu, al- though Bhattacharya is much more critical in his use of Vijnanabhiksu  than is Dasgupta.6

Each approach is clearly a "constructive effort" and has offered  important new insights in understanding the system as a whole. Strik- ing, however, is the divergence in perspective that each approach  represents. There is usually, in the history of scholarship, an overall convergence of scholarly views, but in the case of Samkhya philosophy  a scholarly consensus has not obtained. Garbe and Frauwallner can- not both be correct. K. G. Bhattacharya's ". . . grand system of  speculative metaphysics" bears little resemblance to Garbe's ancient  philosophy of nature or Frauwallner's view of Samkhya as an elemen- tary and simplistic, though nevertheless important, epistemology.  Dasgupta and Bhattacharya come close to convergence in their common use of Vijnanabhiksu, but, whereas Dasgupta sees the genius of Samkhya in the explanatory power of its guna theory (as interpreted by Vijnanabhiksu and given an updated scientific explanation by Β. N. Seal), K. C. Bhattacharya identifies the genius of Samkhya in its emphasis on "reflection as spiritual function" and on its being a philosophy of spontaneous freedom.

In the present chapter, rather than following any one of these an- cient or modern approaches, the Samkhya system is constructed in a  somewhat different manner. While, of course, benefiting from, and using where appropriate the approaches already mentioned, the "constructive effort" in the present context seeks to present Samkhya  philosophy as a total functioning system, on analogy with what Witt- genstein calls a "complete system of human communication." or a  "form of life," or a "system of thought and action" for purposes of communicating a way of life.7 The focus, in other words, is on grasping Samkhya philosophy as a systemic, synchronic, and paradigmatic network of notions in which the various transactions within the larger system come to be exhibited in a more coherent intrasystemic way.  Admittedly, such an interpretive approach is not as useful for compar- ing and contrasting Samkhya with other kinds of modeling systems in  Indian philosophy (for example, Vaisesika, Buddhist, or Vedanta models), nor is it an especially useful approach if one is attempting a historical treatment of Samkhya. It is to be noted, however, that  these latter shortcomings are notoriously typical of Samkhya litera- ture itself. That is to say, the usual intersystemic polemics of Indian  philosophy are glaringly absent in most Samkhya literature, and more than that, there is no concern whatever in the Samkhya literature for dealing with the history of the tradition. In other words, a systemic, synchronic, and paradigmatic approach may, in fact, more accurately reflect an original and authentic Samkhya method of philosophizing.
At the same time, of course, it is clear enough that the Samkhya system did not emerge fully grown, like Athena from the head of Zeus, even though the Samkhya texts make precisely such claims for the founder of the system, Kapila.8 Samkhya philosophy was hardly the product of a single mind in ancient times, pace Garbe, nor was it a blurred set of intuitions that finally got its house in order through the genius of Vijnanabhiksu, pace Dasgupta. The history of the tradition has already been surveyed in the last chapter and need not be repeated here, but it may be useful to summarize briefly the diachronic, locations for the synchronic system that is to be presented in the sequel, namely:

1. There was a coherent Samkhya conceptual system, often refer- red to as the sastitantra ("the system or science of sixty topics"),  that was widely known by the year 400 of the Common Era (that is to say, the interim period that is post-Isvarakrsna and pre-Dignaga). 

2. The conceptual system had been in existence for some centu- ries earlier and had been undergoing considerable modifica- tion through the work of Pancasikha, Varsaganya, Vindhya- vasin, and so on.

3. There were probably a variety of attempts in this early period  to summarize the basic contours of the system, but one sum- mary came to be accepted as a standard presentation, namely,  that summary as set forth in Isvarakrsna's Samkhyakarika.

4. This system, modified in some important respects (along the lines of Varsaganya's and Vindhyavasin's views) is the basis of Patanjali's TogasUtra and its commentaries. 

5. The commentaries on the Karika come considerably later, and apart from the Tuktidipika1 appear to lack a firsthand grasp of the system qua system, and even the Tuktidipika presupposes  the full content of the system instead of presenting that con- tent.

6. The Tattvasamasa and the SamkhyasUtra together with their commentaries, though undoubtedly preserving much old material, are nevertheless late texts (post-1000) that tend to interpret the old Samkhya system with a notable Vedanta bias.
