khya tradition itself. Regarding this latter point, one has the impression that many of the characteristic notions of Samkhya were central largely to the later issues in Indian philosophy and were probably much  less prominent within the original Samkhya speculative environ- ment. In other words, later commentators were interrogating  Samkhya philosophy from the perspective of their own philosophical agendas—for example, Nyaya argumentation, Buddhist logic, Vedanta  metaphysics, and so forth—and were simply uninterested in, or un- aware of, Samkhya's own speculative agenda. K. G. Bhattacharya has  expressed the matter well:

> Much of Samkhya literature appears to have been lost, and there seems to be no continuity of tradition from ancient times up to the age of the commentators. In such systematic works as we have, one  seems to have a hazy view of a grand system of speculative meta- physics.... The interpretation of all ancient systems requires a  constructive effort; but while in the case of some systems where we have a large volume of literature and a continuity of tradition, the construction is mainly of the nature of translation of ideas in to modern concepts, here in Samkhya the construction at many places involves supplying of missing links from one's imagination. It is risky work, but unless one does it one cannot be said to understand  Samkhya as a philosophy. It is a task that one is obliged to under- take. It is a fascinating task because Samkhya is a bold, construc- tive philosophy.1 

The Samkhya system qua system, then, is an interesting lacuna in our understanding of ancient India's first systematic philosophizing, an intriguing intellectual puzzle that requires a "constructive effort" (to use K. C. Bhattacharya's idiom) in order to piece it together, but a puzzle that if even partly unscrambled could provide many valuable perspectives for the cultural historian, the historian of philosophy, and the pure philosopher. For the cultural historian, a fuller grasp of Samkhya could possibly provide improved interpretive perspectives for understanding the complex symbol systems that underlie so much of Indian religion, art, law, mythology, and medical theorizing. For the historian of Indian philosophy, a fuller grasp of the Samkhya system could possibly provide a sharper awareness of the network of archaic notions and values that launched many of the first systematic reflections in Indian philosophy. For the pure philosopher, a fuller grasp of the Samkhya system could possibly provide a better grasp of that set of primordial intuitions by means of which South Asians first addressed questions about being, nonbeing, change, causation, and so forth, in a systematic way—a SouthAsian surrogate, as it were, for a context of primordial philosophizing that thinkers such as Heideg-
