the various Samkhya enumerations into more coherent patterns.

To some extent, of course, the textual tradition itself offers some halt- ing steps in this direction. The Tuktidipika, for example, offers several  intriguing interpretations that provide a larger view of the Samkhya system as a whole, certainly more so than the Karika itself and all of its  other commentaries. Similarly, Bhavaganesa in his TattvayathSrthya- dipana (on the Tattvasamasa) provides a "constructive effort" in Bhatta- charya's sense, as does Vijnanabhiksu in his Samkhyapravacanabhasya,  although both of them, unfortunately, Vedanticize Samkhya more than would seem warranted. Such efforts are important, however, in providing helpful clues about the manner in which the indigenous philosophical tradition interpreted the old Samkhya system, as well  as in warning against the dangers of bias, excessive polemic, and ana- chronism in any constructive undertaking.

Among modern scholarly "constructive efforts" (apart, of course, from the standard summaries of Samkhya that one finds in numerous textbooks), one can identify four distinct approaches to reconstructing the Samkhya system, namely, those of Richard Garbe, Surendranath  Dasgupta, Erich Frauwallner, and K. C. Bhattacharya.2 Garbe cons- trues the old Samkhya system as primarily an ancient philosophy of  nature, a unique system that must have been the product of a single  mind (either Kapila or Pancasikha) in ancient times. There is, there- fore, neither a "preclassical Samkhya" nor a postclassical Samkhya.  There is one ancient system, and one can range freely throughout the entire scope of Samkhya literature in reconstructing that system.3  Surendranath Dasgupta approaches his construction from the oppo- site direction. The old Samkhya-Yoga texts are notoriously difficult  to interpret, and it is only with Vijnanabhiksu in his Samkhyapravacana- bhasya (in the medieval period) that one reaches a firm basis for piecing  together the contours of the Samkhya system as a whole. The key notions of the system, therefore, are presented through the interpretive  perspective of Vijnanabhiksu's Vedantin metaphysics.4 Erich Frau- wallner (following the anti-Garbe polemic of Hermann Oldenberg)  focuses primarily on Samkhya as an important position in the history of epistemological discussions within Indian philosophy. Frauwallner construes Samkhya's philosophy of nature as deriving largely from Pancasikha with its epistemological giounding given by Varsaganya and Vindhyavasin. Isvarakrsna's Karika is only a later summary of the system and fails to provide an adequate account of the old Samkhya epistemology, which, therefore, must be reconstructed from other  sources. Frauwallner relies heavily on the Tuktidipika in his construc- tion of the final Samkhya system and reconstructs Samkhya cosmology  from the old Puranas.5 Finally, K. G. Bhattacharya construes the Samkhya system as a bold "philosophy of the subject" that is ". . . based on speculative insight" and that "... demands imaginative-
