introspective effort at every stage on the part of the interpreter."  Like Dasgupta, Bhattacharya relies heavily on Vijnanabhiksu, al- though Bhattacharya is much more critical in his use of Vijnanabhiksu  than is Dasgupta.6

Each approach is clearly a "constructive effort" and has offered  important new insights in understanding the system as a whole. Strik- ing, however, is the divergence in perspective that each approach  represents. There is usually, in the history of scholarship, an overall convergence of scholarly views, but in the case of Samkhya philosophy  a scholarly consensus has not obtained. Garbe and Frauwallner can- not both be correct. K. G. Bhattacharya's ". . . grand system of  speculative metaphysics" bears little resemblance to Garbe's ancient  philosophy of nature or Frauwallner's view of Samkhya as an elemen- tary and simplistic, though nevertheless important, epistemology.  Dasgupta and Bhattacharya come close to convergence in their common use of Vijnanabhiksu, but, whereas Dasgupta sees the genius of Samkhya in the explanatory power of its guna theory (as interpreted by Vijnanabhiksu and given an updated scientific explanation by Β. N. Seal), K. C. Bhattacharya identifies the genius of Samkhya in its emphasis on "reflection as spiritual function" and on its being a philosophy of spontaneous freedom.

In the present chapter, rather than following any one of these an- cient or modern approaches, the Samkhya system is constructed in a  somewhat different manner. While, of course, benefiting from, and using where appropriate the approaches already mentioned, the "constructive effort" in the present context seeks to present Samkhya  philosophy as a total functioning system, on analogy with what Witt- genstein calls a "complete system of human communication." or a  "form of life," or a "system of thought and action" for purposes of communicating a way of life.7 The focus, in other words, is on grasping Samkhya philosophy as a systemic, synchronic, and paradigmatic network of notions in which the various transactions within the larger system come to be exhibited in a more coherent intrasystemic way.  Admittedly, such an interpretive approach is not as useful for compar- ing and contrasting Samkhya with other kinds of modeling systems in  Indian philosophy (for example, Vaisesika, Buddhist, or Vedanta models), nor is it an especially useful approach if one is attempting a historical treatment of Samkhya. It is to be noted, however, that  these latter shortcomings are notoriously typical of Samkhya litera- ture itself. That is to say, the usual intersystemic polemics of Indian  philosophy are glaringly absent in most Samkhya literature, and more than that, there is no concern whatever in the Samkhya literature for dealing with the history of the tradition. In other words, a systemic, synchronic, and paradigmatic approach may, in fact, more accurately reflect an original and authentic Samkhya method of philosophizing.
