# Meaning and Emptiness: Re-introducing Ibn Arabi to Late Modern Minds

## Philipp Valentini

This essay is included in the collection Esoteric Lacan

## IBSN: 978-1-78660-971-7

The great Muslim teacher Ibn ‘Arabī (1165–1240) has been introduced in  the  West  first  through  Renaissance  epistemologies  and  later,  in  the  twen- tieth  century,  through  late  occultist  epistemologies.  Neoplatonism,  Her- meticism,  Christian  Kabbalah,  and  Martinist  Free-Masonry  were  mingled   to  create  a  hermeneutical  device  through  which  the  modern  scholar  or   convert  to  Islam  could  approach  Ibn  ‘Arabī  ‘s  texts.  Nowadays,  however,   historians  of  Sufism  tend  to  read  Ibn  ‘Arabī  only  through  a  Neoplatonist   framework,1  while  specialists  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī  generally  defend  the  idea  that   his teachings cannot be reduced to a Neoplatonist paradigm.2 The first part  of this chapter shall argue that Ibn ‘Arabī is not a Neoplatonist. This is then  followed  by  a  digression  into  Lacanian  theory  that  takes  Lacan’s  attempt   to  extract  himself  from  the  kind  of  thinking  of  a  “Christian  Kabbalist”  (1962) as well as from late occultism (1975–1976) seriously. The digression  through Lacanian theory enables me then to use his transformation of the  French language in such a way that we are no longer in need of the couple  on which European modernity has constructed its imperial apprehension of  other spiritualities: the knot “Being&Consciousness.”
# Adam and Ijad, or Why Ibn Arabi is not a Neoplatonist

In  the  first  pages  of  his  book  on  the  history  of  Western  Sufism,3  Mark   Sedgwick argues that it is the shared episteme of Neoplatonism that made  it  possible  for  European  spiritual  seekers  to  find  something  akin  to  their   own  world-views  in  the  texts  of  Muslim  mystics.  The  discursive  markers   that designate a text as Neoplatonic are, according to him, the following:

* the  relation  between  the  ultimate  One  and  the  many  is  that  of  an   ontological emanation: “everything must derive from the One without  implicating the One in any form of change.”4

* the individual soul found in matter and the universal soul found in in- telligence are one: “by parallel a landscape which a number of people  are  admiring  remains  one,  even  though  each  person  has  their  own   separate and different view of that landscape.”5

* Neoplatonism implies a chain of being in which being is homogeneous  to consciousness. This is to say that the consciousness—or as Sedgwick  calls  it  the  “life  force”6—of  being  is  being  itself  and  not  something   other than being itself. 

On the basis of these three discursive markers, Sedgwick then argues that  Ibn ‘Arabī is a Neoplatonist because he sees God as both “One and Intel- ligence”;7  in  modern  terms,  we  would  say  as  simultaneously  being  and   consciousness.8

I  would  add  to  these  three  items  a  fourth,  namely  a  presence  of  the   metaphor of the mirror that Plotinus uses to describe the relation between  matter  and  intelligence.  Material  bodies  are  similar  to  mirrors  in  which   images of being appear and disappear. Plotinus writes: 

> The being which is imagined in it is “not” being but only a fleeting frivolity;  accordingly, the things which seem to come to be in it are frivolities, nothing  but phantoms on a phantom, just like something in a mirror which really exists  in one place but is reflected in another.9 

The  purpose  of  the  metaphor  of  the  mirror  in  a  similar  context  is  then  to   acknowledge the difference between different existent things while remain- ing  mindful  of  the  fact  that  “we  cannot  think  of  something  of  God  here   and something else there, nor of all God gathered at some one spot: there  is  an  instantaneous  presence  everywhere,  nothing  containing  and  nothing 
left void, everything therefore fully held by the divine.”10 What is of impor- tance  here  is  that  in  a  Neoplatonist  framework,  this  void  and  emptiness   imply negative qualities that must be avoided. According to Plotinus, mat- ter is “no-thing,” “evil,” “feminine,” “measureless,” but this evilness is not  ontological,  simply  because  all  that  exists  participates  in  the  fundamental   goodness of the One. Matter is then an inverted mirror of the One which is  also “no-thing” and “measureless.”11 It is this inverted analogy that makes  the soul fear a sense of horror vacui while it flees towards the One: will it  go back to the nothingness (being without a form and thus stuck in the mud  of evil) it came from or reach the intelligence of the One? In the words of  Seidel:

> As it progresses towards the formless, says Plotinus, the soul fears that it will  meet nothingness (VI.9.3) the shapeless form of its origin: chaos. Contemplat- ing the ghostly shapeless form that would be matter or the shapeless form that  is the One could easily excite horror vacui, whichever emptiness or chaos that  might be.12 

Again emptiness is seen as a conceptual enemy that disturbs the spiritual  process  that  allows  me  to  move  towards  the  utter  perfection  of  the  One.   What  those  images  on  the  mirror  then  reflect  is  not  different  from  being   itself.  Matter  is  “non-being”  and  thus  a  “spectre  and  phantasm  of  bulk;  it   is a weak and pale ghost incapable of having a form.”13 In this sense, Ploti- nus’s philosophy is one that praises “autoeroticism,” in that the soul discov- ers first that the body is a reflection of its own light, while later it finds its  identity  in  its  being  a  diffraction  of  the  One.14  Or,  to  say  it  in  Levinassian   terms, the quest for the persistence into being is a quest for the persistence  of the extension of one’s identity over the disturbing presence of the other  that  faces  me  and  thus  asks  me  irredeemably  not  to  be,  but  rather  to  be   accountable for her/him

Now, a simple remark of Ibn ‘Arabī should already raise our attention to  the fact that his teachings do not praise the contemplation of pure being as  such as the most perfect spiritual vision one may receive. He writes:

> to envision a thing itself by itself is not analogous to envisioning it in another  matter/order  than  itself,  this  is  to  say  in  something  that  acts  as  a  mirror.   Indeed,  the  thing  that  acts  as  a  mirror  makes  apparent  to  the  thing  that  is   reflected its own ipseity in the shape of the place in which it is reflected.15

In  other  words,  the  shape  of  the  thing  that  acts  as  a  mirror  marks  a   place.  This  marking-the-place  signs  the  form  in  which  the  reflected  thing 
envisions  itself.  Houria  Abdelouahed  has  shown—although  more  in  an   intuitive  way  than  through  a  clear-cut  demonstration—that  the  metaphor   of the mirror for Ibn ‘Arabī is not a narcissistic one (nor a plotinian one).  This is because the relation between the thing that is reflected and its own  reflection is less important for its own self-knowledge than the speech that  the breath of the reflected thing inscribes on the surface of the thing-that- acts-as-mirror.  It  is  through  that  speech  addressed  to  another-than-itself   that the reflected thing seizes its own identity.16

In order to clarify why Abdelouahed’s article breaks with the hegemonic  European interpretation of Ibn ‘Arabī it is first necessary to introduce the  reader  to  the  general  Western  view  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī’s  metaphysics.  On  the   Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  website,  in  an  article  on  Ibn  ‘Arabī  written by William Chittick, we read the following

> Foremost among the technical terms of philosophy that Ibn ‘Arabī employs is  wujûd, existence or being, a word that had come to the centre of philosophi- cal  discourse  with  Avicenna.  In  its  Koranic  and  everyday  Arabic  sense,  wu- jûd means to find, come across, become conscious of, enjoy, be ecstatic. It was  used  to  designate  existence  because  what  exists  is  what  is  found  and  experi- enced. For Ibn ‘Arabī, the act of finding—that is, perception, awareness, and  consciousness—is never absent from the fact of being found.17 

Thus, according to Chittick, Ibn ‘Arabī identifies consciousness with being  through the concept of wujūd that he translates either as being or as exis- tence. In his book devoted to Ibn ‘Arabī, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, we  read  the  following  translation  of  a  short  text  written  by  Ibn  ‘Arabī  about   what is opposed to wujūd, this is to say ‘adam:

> The Real possesses the attribute of Being and the attribute of Necessary Be- ing through Himself. His contrary is called absolute non-existence (al-'adam  al-muṭlaq). . . . It is obvious that God creates the things and brings them out  of  non-existence  into  existence  .  .  .  the  apparent  situation  is  that  their  non- existence is a relative non-existence (‘adam al iḍafi).18 

What is clear from Chittick’s quotation is that Ibn ‘Arabī states that there  are  two  forms  of  ‘adam:  one  that  is  absolute  and  one  that  is  relative.  His   teachings  indeed  imply  that  each  singular  and  concrete  thing  that  is  per- ceived has an immutable essence in God’s eternal science—that is, that it  has never left the relative ‘adam to which it belongs and is not identical to  an  absolute  ‘adam  from  which  nothing  could  emerge.  Yet  this  translation 
has been challenged by Eric Winkel, who is currently translating the major  opus of Ibn ‘Arabī, The Meccan Openings. He has decided to translate the  word 'adam as “emptiness.”19 I defend Winkel’s decision because the word  “non-existence”  raises  a  series  of  contradictions  that  Ibn  ‘Arabī  could  not   have had in mind. If we read the book of Ibn ‘Arabī that comes the clos- est to a philosophical treatise, The Production of Circles, we encounter the  following statement: “Know that wujūd and ‘adam without a thing are not added  upon what is wujūd (mawjūd) and what is ‘adam (m‘adum), but rather it is wujūd  and ‘adam itself.” In order to illustrate this point Ibn ‘Arabī then writes: “Zayd is  mawjud in his essence in the market but is ‘adam (m‘adum) in his home.”20

The statement according to which a thing can be simultaneously a thing  that is mawjūd and a thing that is m‘adum needs to be at the centre of our  focus.  Indeed,  Ibn  ‘Arabī  argues  that  for  the  thing  to  be  simultaneously   in a state of wujūd and in a state of ‘adam, wujūd and ‘adam must not be  a  quality  of  the  thing.  If  they  were  a  quality,  then  the  law  of  contradic- tion would apply (the thing cannot be black and white at the same time).  However,  Ibn  ‘Arabī  declares  that  a  thing  can  be  by  its  very  essence   wujūd  and  ‘adam  simultaneously.  Now,  if  I  translate  ‘adam  with  non- existence I will necessarily be led to treat ‘adam as a quality that is added  to the essence and by which I qualify the essence of the thing that I am  describing and thus enter a set of contradictory statements. The sentence  about Zayd would then read like: “Zayd is existent in the market but non- existent at home.” Either Zayd is existent or he is non-existent. To be in a  place does not make him non-existent. What translators then usually do is  either add in brackets the expression “with regard to different relations”  or  the  words  “with  regard  to  time  and  place,”21  which  are  not  found  in   the  original  text.  In  this  way  they  separate  the  essence  of  Zayd  from  his   being-existent and being non-existent and thus do exactly the opposite of  what Ibn ‘Arabī is here teaching.22

f we now translate ‘adam with emptiness, as Winkel does, then the con- tradictions constructed by the translators simply disappear. We would then  read “Zayd is present in the market but in a state of (absolute) emptiness  in his home.” What makes this presence of Zayd in the market? The simple  fact  that  his  body  senses23  God’s  presence  in  the  market,  but  not  in  his   home. What is then the identity of the body in the emptiness that it senses  when it becomes aware of itself in this same void it has never left?

f there would be only void/emptiness then we would not be able to give  an  account  of  the  interactions  that  make  it  possible  for  void/emptiness  to   be  felt  and  experienced—that  is,  known  by  a  concrete  and  singular  body 
that speaks in a clear way about its essence. Our bodies would feel differ- ent  sets  of  affects  while  holding  to  the  position  that  these  feelings  are  an   illusion.  The  body  in  its  emptiness  would  state  that  it  is  both  an  illusion   and a tangible reality. This is an antinomy from which we cannot escape if  we accept that there is only emptiness. The way out of this antinomy is to  accept the idea that I can only understand myself through the speech and  meaning  that  is  given  to  me  in  my  interactions  with  others.  The  simple   experience  that  proves  this  point  is  given  by  the  fact  that  I  cannot  feel  at   once  the  totality  of  my  body.  It  is  only  by  watching  the  body’s  reflection,   feeling  the  touch  of  the  other  and  finally  being  addressed  by  the  speech   of the one that gazes at me that I start knowing my own body. This is the  reason why in an Islamic context the contemplation of the God that speaks  and  thus  socially  organises  the  letters  of  the  Qur’an  is  perceived  as  being   more perfect than the silent mental image of the Self of the First Principle  that is contemplated by philosophers and ascetics.24

In  order  to  further  develop  this  thought,  we  must  focus  our  attention   on a second term that challenges western Christian and Aristotelian logics.  The notion of ijād shares with the term wujūd the same linguistic root. It is  thus often translated with the term “existentiation.”25 Ibn ‘Arabī has written  a book whose purpose is to help the disciple put into practice the spiritual- ity he is teaching. In this small work, The Book on the Secret of the Divine  Names, he comments on every divine name by describing how it rules the  life of the disciple and what use he can make of this divine name to reach  the  knowledge  of  God’s  supreme  Ipseity.  We  find  in  the  chapter  devoted   to  the  name  The  Creator  the  following  opening  sentence:  “The  Creator   predetermines the things before he existentiates (ijād) their essences, after  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  wujūd  (mawjūd)  in  the  second  degree  of  their   determination.”26  What  this  sentence  entails  is  that  Allah  first  expresses   His  concern  for27  the  immutable  essences  (He  addresses  their  singular   realities)  and  then  determines  their  form  (their  capacity  to  receive  God’s  light that enables each one of these things to perceive and feel its identity).  When these essences are only in the intention of God they are not aware of  the emptiness in which they find themselves in, while when they receive a  form—a body that feels the reality of itself and of the other than itself—they  start to become aware of the emptiness in which they find themselves in. 

But what does the power of ijād bring forth? It brings forth a pre-created  synthetic  and  folded  meaning  that  can  be  understood  only  if  it  is  experi- enced with a whole body that becomes aware of all its nuances through all  of its senses. What the body then does is to unfold the pre-created meaning  it carries through its entire existence, while bringing it back to its first issuer.
How  does  Ibn  ‘Arabī  explicate  this  idea?  In  the  book  quoted  before,   The Production of Circles, he invents a myth that has the function of illus- trating his teachings on the divine names. At the outset of this myth, each  single divine name finds itself having keys that would entitle it to exert its  authority on something. But, at this moment of the myth, not a single name  is  confronted  with  the  thing  that  receives  its  authority.  Therefore,  all  the   divine names are not aware of the full meaning of their authorities. This is  why all the divine names moved towards the name Allah and “asked for the  wujūd of the Heavens and the Earth until they would be able to put the key  in the right door.”28 What ijād thus brings forth is a meaning, if by meaning  we intend the following: a given combination of divine names that exercise  a specific authority on a single body, which thus expresses the effects of the  divine initial intention addressed to its immutable essence and the rule that  has  combined  these  same  divine  names  in  this  specific  manner.  It  is  then   the mission of man to formulate a personal clear language by emulating the  clearest language of all: the Qur’an. Man becomes aware of his mission in  the  emptiness  in  which  he  finds  himself.  In  other  words,  we  could  define   ijād with the following: the power by which a body becomes aware of a pre- eternal meaning that is addressed to its singularity. 

However,  what  this  definition  leaves  unexplained  is  what  “awareness”  here entails for a specific meaning.

# AWARENESSES AND MAKING ThE “IMPOSSIBlE” PRESENT

“Consciousness”  is  a  Western  conceptual  construction  that  dates  at  least   from  the  nineteenth  century.29  Applying  consciousness  to  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is   anachronistic and misleading. What we have instead is a topology of aware- nesses  that  the  body  feels  along  its  path  towards  the  experience  of  God’s  utmost Reality.

One  of  the  most  important  books  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is  the  Fusus  al-Hikam.  Each chapter of this book is devoted to the wisdom of a specific prophet.  The  first  chapter  is  devoted  to  Adam,  while  the  last  chapter  is  devoted  to   Muhammad, who, in the Islamic tradition designates the one that encom- passes  the  perfections  of  all  previous  prophets  and  by  his  own  incompa- rability  fully  abrogates  the  laws  and  spiritual  pedagogies  related  to  those   laws  that  are  now  bygone.  As  God  cannot  be  known  in  His  own  Ipseity,   that  perfection  is  achieved  for  the  one  that  sees  God  in  the  mirror  of  the   muhammadian presence. The mirror is not understood by the Shaykh, Ibn  ‘Arabī, as a projection of the identical. The mirror is rather a place where
the vacuity of one’s self leaves a delimited place for the synthetic and folded  meanings that come from God to occur and thus take a constructed gram- matical form. In this sense, the mirror is not a narcissistic metaphor, but one  that leaves the possibility open for a meeting with the other-than-myself. 

This  point  becomes  evident  if  we  compare  the  contemplation  of  God   in  the  mirror  of  Adam  with  the  contemplation  of  God  in  Muhammad’s  mirror  while  focusing  on  what  forms  of  awarennesses  these  two  different   contemplations entail. In the chapter devoted to Adam, the affects that are  evoked refer to a sensation that is felt on the surface of the skin “and they  did  not  feel/become  aware,30  (wa  hum  lā  yash'urūn,  which  here  is  about   the angels that do not know all the names that God has given to Adam); or  affects  that  are  perceived  by  the  speculative  mind  that  draws  analogies  to   produce universal ideas “fī‘l dhihn”;31 or a form of perception that literally  grasps  the  thing  that  it  intends  to  perceive  “idrak”  (here  referring  to  the   fact  that  the  world  is  not  able  to  know  its  subtle  relation  with  the  Real  in   the same way He understands it).32 In the chapter devoted to Muhammad,  the senses refer to an act of testifying to the Truth that is related to a pas- sage in the Qur’an which narrates the vision of God that innocents experi- ence during their martyrdom.33 Along with this act of vision (mushāhadat)34  of God beyond any comparison, we find such faculties as the sight of God  in  the  world  of  analogies,35  the  fragrance  of  fine  perfume  and  the  taste  of   the good things36 that guide the servant on the right path, and, finally, the  hearing of the conversation between God and His servant.37 All these five  faculties guide humans towards the knowledge of God’s Ipseity. How? By  contemplating the power of God’s first injunction in which His concern for  the immutable essences is felt. The word that means either order or affair  (amr)  occurs  three  times  in  this  chapter,38  while  three  is  also  the  number   that  Ibn  ‘Arabī  attributes  to  Muhammad.  It  is  then  not  only  a  body  that   feels with all its senses God’s Ipseity while contemplating His Ipseity in the  mirror of Muhammad, but, above all, it is a body that has become able to  be empowered by the supreme divine order and thus be accountable for all  creation before God. This body has the power to shape its affects according  to the prophetic revealed Law and its social interactions through the spoken  words of the Qur’an.39

If the thing that receives wujūd is delimited and the One that emits the  meanings that are carried by the thing is unlimited, what is the identity of  the limit that shapes the form of the thing that is delimited? It is here that  Ibn ‘Arabī’s insights on the “impossible” bring his entire thought one step  further away from a Plotinian-like way of thinking. If Ibn ‘Arabī would have 
been a Plotinian Neoplatonist, he would have manipulated the impossible  as a notion that refers to that which cannot be by nature, or by necessity,  or  by  circumstances.40  But  this  is  not  the  case  for  Ibn  ‘Arabī,  the  Shaykh   al-Akbar. His treatment of the impossible makes it something that is active  in its constantly limiting the shapes of the forms that are uplifted by God’s  wujūd.  The  “impossible”  for  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is  the  “thing  that  cannot  receive   wujūd.”41  Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  speak  about  the  “impossible”  and   thus to use it actively to circumscribe an argument by saying: “Suppose the  impossible.” When my speech acts in this way it gives, in Ibn ‘Arabī’s words,  a “presence to the impossible.”42 We have stated before that the experience  of sharing with God a common meaning as such has a stronger perfection  than the act of only experiencing emptiness as such. This is why the argu- ment on the presence of the “impossible” is of such importance. It comes  directly from the Qur’an and follows those verses in which God describes  impossible situations so as to encourage His believers to be thankful: “Had  there  been  in  these  two  (the  heaven  and  the  earth)  other  gods  (as  well)   apart from Allah, then both would have been destroyed.”43 Thus, if we are  able to give presence to the impossible, then this very act of speech is that  which makes it possible for an unfolded meaning to become an articulated  and  clear  speech  in  which  words  are  distinguished  from  another.44  The   impossible  is  then  the  absolute  ‘adam  upon  which  God  reflects  Himself,   a  reflection  that  is  best  grasped  and  tasted  in  the  mirror  of  Muhammad.   Following the translation of Winkel, we would say that the “impossible” is  the effective “light-blocker”45 that makes it possible to speak about the limit  between different things, and thus to transform a pre-created synthetic and  singularising meaning that is associated with each one of our essences into,  in the world of bodies, an articulated speech. 

# TWO FORMS OF MYSTICISM

Knowing that our European languages are heavily influenced by a modern  grammar and philosophy that adhere to the knot Being&Conciousness, how  can  we  poetically  transform  our  languages  so  that  we  might  get  nearer  to   the teachings of Ibn ‘Arabī that work through Wujūd&’Adam&Awareness?

Lacan  draws  a  distinction  between  two  forms  of  mysticism.  The  first  is   what  he  calls  occultism,  while  the  second  is  a  mysticism  of  the  Law.  Ibn   ‘Arabī had been introduced in France and the United States in the twen- tieth  century  through  a  modern  occultism  (foremost  that  of  Ivan  Aguéli
and René Guénon) which Lacan had closely known in his youth.46 Modern  occultism47 designates a set of spiritual discourses and practices that histori- cally have begun with the French magician Eliphas Levy (1810–1875) and  ended with the New Age movement in the 1970s. It organises an eclectic  set of spiritual teachings in a self-explaining philosophical order that histori- cally comes from Martinist Free-Masonry, popular spinizosim and a reac- tualisation  of  late  neo-alexandrian  philosophy.48  This  philosophical  order   is  considered  then  to  be  a  “scientific”  and  “pure  doctrine”49  of  the  total   identity between being as such and consciousness: “the total and absolute  knowledge . . . is . . . the realisation of the totality of being.”50 

“Science”  and  “Pure  doctrine”  are  the  reasons  why  the  translations  of   modern occult teachings into social interactions have most often taken the  form of cults,51 as there must be an embodied “Guru” that not only repeat- edly  declares  authoritatively  the  identity  between  these  two  terms,  but   also  expels  from  his  sight  anything  that  exceeds,  lacks,  disturbs  the  belief   in  their  identity.  Furthermore,  according  to  the  same  logic,  the  modern   occultist  tries  to  enter  the  totality  of  all  that  is  in  an  immediate  way  by   investing  in,  with  a  strong  desire  and  expectation,  the  word  “initiation.”52  In  a  modern  context,  “initiation”  would  then  bring  the  spiritual  seeker   directly  into  the  utmost  mystery  of  all  that  is.  The  seeker  is  thus  moved   by the idea that there is someone in the world that has a stable possession  of  the  whole-of-knowledge.  This  “Guru”  is  entirely  untouched  by  human   passions  and  must  be  an  embodiment  of  a  pure  intellectual  doctrine.  By   meeting this person, the modern spiritual seeker believes that he can gain  a  direct  access  to  the  whole-of-being  that  is  entirely  known  by  the  one   that  embodies  the  spiritual  master.  As  Guénon  himself  puts  it:  “We  have   already stated before that initiation must have a non-human origin . . . this  is also the case for the rites and symbols it uses.”53 In this sense, a spiritual  quest  informed  by  Guénon’s  doctrine  is  the  quest  for  an  enjoyment,  as   the  pupil  invests  his  desire  in  the  body  of  the  master  who  embodies  the   subject  who  is  supposed-to-know  the  whole-of-knowledge.  The  body  of   the spiritual master acts, in a Lacanian language, as the objet petit a54 that  is  a  mediator  between  the  whole-of-knowledge,  the  whole-of-being  and   the modern spiritual seeker.55 The “Guru” carries then for the disciple the   Name-of-the-Father that stabilises the awareness the pupil has of his own  body  (that  is  seen  through  the  eyes  of  his  “Guru”)  while  he  sutures  the   whole-of-being with the whole-that-is-known.

It is after having started to investigate the differences between a Chris- tian Kabbalist way of thinking and a Jewish way that Lacan acknowledged,  on  19  December  1962:  “Someone  called  me  the  last  of  the  Christian  
kabbalists.”56  However,  it  is  then  only  ten  years  later,  on  3  March  1972   that  Lacan  attempts  finally  to  step  out  of  a  late  occultist  worldview  based   on the Name-of the-Father: “I have been on the path of the Name-of-the- Father. . . . But, I will never do this again.” To understand this remark, we  need  to  introduce  the  second  form  of  mysticism  that  Lacan  presented  in   his seminars.

The pure signifier “revealed Law” casts outside of its remit the desire for  a perfect symmetry between the masculine position that aims at controlling  the  whole-of-knowledge  and  the  feminine  position  that  constantly  eludes   this control.57 This second form of mysticism is particularly evident in the  seminar The Other Side of Psychoanalysis (1969–1970), when Lacan com- ments  on  the  history  of  the  biblical  prophet  Hosea.  The  Torah  here  nar- rates  the  story  of  the  prophet  Hosea  who  has  married  a  sacred  prostitute   who thus praises her divinity though sexual rites. He orders her to repent.  This matrimonial relation is transmuted into a spiritual hermeneutics of the  relation between God and Israel. God’s unconditional love for His people  is such that he keeps the door of repentance always open even when they  do  praise  other  divinities  through  sexual  rites.  What  thus  strikes  Lacan  in   this story is the very fact that YHWH does not want to know anything about  sexual sacred rites. In fact, as Lacan observes, YHWH seems to be the only  divinity of these times that does not want to know anything about sex. 

YHWH makes four commands that indicate how strongly He rejects the  present state of the people of Israel who practice sexual magical rites: (1)  Hosea must call his son Jezrael because He will put an end to the house of  Israel; (2) Hosea must call his daughter Ruhama (which means “not cher- ished”) because YHWH no longer cherishes the house of Israel; (3) Hosea  must  call  his  last  son  Lo-Ammi  (“not  my  people”)  because  the  house  of   Israel is no longer His people; and (4) the deeds of prostitution undertaken  by  Hosea’s  wife—and  thus  the  people  of  Israel  who  praise  other  divini- ties—must be shown in broad daylight. It is only once these four commands  are  enacted  that  YHWH  will  bring  back  in  the  solitude  of  the  desert  His   people  so  that  they  may  repent  and  answer  positively  His  love:  “You  will   then  call  me  ‘My  Spouse’  and  no  more  ‘My  Baal’”  (Hosea  2:18).  In  the   conversation  between  the  scholar  of  the  Torah  Caquot  and  Lacan  in  the   1969–1970 seminar, the former notes that the formula for “My Spouse” is  Ish, which is not gendered, while Baal means the “Master” and its feminine  “Beoula” has the meaning of a woman who is in need of a husband. It is this  thought that stands behind the following remark by Lacan about the God of  Hosea: “There is one sure thing, all relations with women are outside the  Law.”58  In  other  words,  the  pure  signifier  of  the  revealed  Law  leaves  the 
gap  that  separates  the  whole-that-is  (the  feminine  position  of  the  bodies   that eludes the political power that wants to control them or Beoula) from  the  whole-that-is-known  (the  masculine  position  that  tries  to  organise  the   bodies  according  to  its  own  philosophical  categories,  Baal)  open  without   ever trying to suture them, without conflating one with the other.

Why is this the case? Because the revealed Law is commented upon in  such  a  way  that  no  content  ever  closes  its  signification.  Instead,  the  Law   operates  as  the  abundance  of  signifying  meaning.  This  is  the  reason  why   God is not interested in any sexual magical rite, as these seek to theopoliti- cally suture the whole-that-is (Beoula) with the whole-that-is-known (Baal). 

Plotinian Neoplatonism as described by Sedgwick in its modern reception  shares with modern occultism the same psychological apparatus that is driven  by  the  horror  vacui  and  the  quest  for  a  master  that  stabilises  by  his  own   embodiment the whole-of-knowledge of the disciple—that is, that enacts the  Name-of-the-Father.  Late  occultism  makes  an  important  use  of  the  myth   of the Androgyne in which by an inner meditation the disciple becomes the  passive “feminine” aspect of the “primordial nature” that is fully grasped by  the reality of the Self and its universal intellect. This universal intellect is fully  displayed in the words and actions of the late occultist master as he is both  the  “uncreated  soul”  and  the  “active  and  detached  soul.”59  In  this  sense,  it   might well be said that modern occultism is a backlash of the sacred of Baal  and Beoula that has been first abolished by Judaism.60

But  once  the  belief  in  this  Big  Other  (the  construction  of  a  socially   embedded  mind  that  believes  that  there  is  somewhere  a  gaze  that  orders   my  thought  in  a  closed  totality  so  that  it  can  fit  the  actual  socio-political   order of things) embodied in the body of the modern-late-occultist-master  evaporates in thin air, the belief in being is gone. Being was only the signi- fier that in our European languages urged the disciple to look for the body  that enfleshes the fictitious whole-of-knowledge of the disciple in the first  place. For Lacan:

> being as such has no meaning at all. Yes, there where we find the word “be- ing”  it  becomes  the  master-signifier  as  the  philosophical  discourse  shows  so   well  that  in  order  to  be  at  the  service  of  being  and  to  be  brilliant,  this  is  to   say  pretty,  it  finds  itself  being  only  a  signifier  that  constantly  plays  the  role   of the master-subject (signifiant m’être61). A Master-subject that is infinitely  redoubled in its mirrors.62

If  there  is  no  being  for  Lacan,  what  does  the  one  that  is  no  more  cling   to?  To  what  Lacan  understands  as  the  Thing:  that  is,  that  which  arouses   my  desire,  but  nonetheless  is  nowhere  to  be  found.  The  Thing  marks  the 
emptiness  and  irreality  of  all  the  objects  my  desire  meets  and  uplifts  the   troubadour to the status of one that not only knows the emptiness of the Big  Other that is nothing else than a social construction, but also to the status of  one that conveys the paradox of desire that is only moved by the emptiness  of its desired object. The Thing is the irrepresentable that makes it possible  to re-present the Real that moves my language, but is never described by  it.63 Or, as Ibn ‘Arabī puts it, desire in its most intense form is always desire  for something that is ‘adam.64

# Return to the Beginnning 

Moreover,  we  are  now  able  to  appreciate  in  a  new  way  the  use  that  the   Islamic  tradition  makes  of  the  Name-of-the-Father.  It  is  a  name  that   is  cut  and  thus  disrupts  any  attempt  to  build  a  symmetry  between  the   whole-that-is  and  the  whole-that-is  known—that  is,  to  tie  again  the  knot   Being&Consciousness.  This  difference  between  the  whole-that-is  and  the   whole-that-is-known  is  best  exemplified  by  two  apparently  contradictory   statements: Ibn ‘Arabī’s remark that Muhammad is “father of the spirits”65  and the Qur’anic verse (33:40): “[And know, O believers, that] Muhammad  is not the father of any one of your men, but is God’s Apostle and the Seal  of all Prophets. And God has indeed full knowledge of everything.”

y confronting these two statements and reading the classical and early  modern  commentators  of  the  Qur’an,  we  understand  that  what  is  here  at   stake  is  that  while  every  existing  essence  of  a  human  individual  is  ex  ante  the expression of a meaning that finds in Muhammad its cosmic and princi- pal source, nevertheless, ex post, on the day of Judgement every biological  father will flee from his child and thus not be accountable for the sins of his  child.66 This is the reason why God has stripped from Muhammad the pos- sibility of being a “father.” Muhammad will not abandon his community but  instead  intercede  for  them,  and,  through  the  mercy  that  is  given  to  Mus- lims, he will also intercede for the whole of humanity on the Day of Judge- ment. In other words, Muhammad mirrors God through three features:

*  His being an orphan67 reminds us of the Qur’anic verse about God: He  “begets not and neither is He begotten” (112:3)

* In the same way that Islam strictly rejects that the term “Father” may  apply to God, it reminds its believers that Muhammad should not be  called father.

* Finally,  in  the  same  way  that  God  pours  out  His  universal  mercy  on   mankind,  Muhammad  is  an  exception  that,  because  he  is  an  excep- tion, is able to work as a mercy to the worlds (in a Lacanian language  we would say that the plural “worlds” tell us that he is the not-all that  eludes  the  oppressive  position  that  tries  to  close  in  one  totality  all- that-is  by  forcefully  giving  it  the  shape  of  the  whole-that-is-known):   “Indeed,  in  this  [Qu’ran]  is  notification  for  a  worshipping  people.   And We have not sent you, [O Muhammad], except as a mercy to the  worlds” (21:106–7).

These  three  analogies  between  God  and  Muhammad  show  us  that  the   position of the Name-of-the-Father is always disrupted in favour of a mercy  that  flows  through  the  opened  gap  between  the  whole-that-is-known  and   the  whole-that-is-open.  This  act  cracks  a  breach  in  the  mind  of  the  late   modern individual who until now wrongly tried to construct a perfect sym- metry  between  being  and  consciousness.  Finally,  this  same  breach  allows   her now to taste the real emptiness that she has never left.

# On the difference between Lacan and Ibn Arabi

What  is  the  fundamental  difference  between  Lacan  and  our  contempo- rary  interpretation  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī’s  teachings  when  it  comes  to  combining   the  signifiers  Emptiness&Revealed  Law&Body?  First,  we  need  to  state   the  immediate  and  obvious  difference.  Both  answer  the  same  transhis- torical  question68—how  is  it  possible  to  feel  emptiness?—but  within  dif- ferent  intellectual  contexts  that  respond  to  a  different  set  of  questions   and  answers.  The  fundamental  problem  that  marks  European  modernity   and  from  which  Lacan  never  entirely  steps  out  of  is:  “How  can  I  find  an   identity  between  being  and  consciousness,  or  rather,  establish  the  knot   Being&Consciousness?” Any answer to a secondary philosophical problem  is marked by the quest to answer this absolutely unanswerable question. On  the other hand, all answers given by Ibn ‘Arabī to such secondary questions  are answers to another unanswerable question, namely: “How do I find an  identity between the way-of-being in the world according to the Law that  establishes  one  that  gives  the  Law  and  another  one  that  abides  by  it,  and   the way-of-being in the world according to the absolute Unity of God which  somehow must exclude any other ontological reality?” Nonetheless, we can  compare  these  two  very  different  contexts  through  a  purely  formal  ques- tion: Around which pivot do Lacan and Ibn ‘Arabī ultimately make the knot  Emptiness&Revealed Law&Body turn?
From this formal point of view, Lacan’s anti-philosophy is still, even in his later days, marked by a hidden quest for the Name-of-the-Father.  In fact, he  praises Joyce for inventing his genealogy, namely, for creating a new master  signifier that empowers his creative drive which ties together the Real (that  constantly  disrupts  the  totality  I  believe  in),  the  Imaginary  (the  belief  in  a   closed  totality)  and  the  Symbolic  (the  objects  that  populate  this  totality)   which structure his mind. In the seminar The Sinthome (1975–1976), Lacan  states that even if Joyce rejected his father because he never acted as a father  to  him,  through  his  literary  style  Joyce  was  able  to  reinvent  new  meanings   associated with his proper noun and thus treat it as a common noun. In this  sense,  the  sound  of  his  proper  noun  becomes  a  new  master-signifier  and   thus a compensation for the loss of his father. In other words, the name-of- the-father once lost comes back into the game through the hidden door of  Joyce’s  capacity  to  glide  on  the  meanings  of  his  proper  name:  “The  noun   which is his, this is what he values at the expense of his father.”69 Yet, this  autoproductive subjectivity can function only if I become father of my own  subjectivity. This is where one still finds a trace of Plotinian Neoplatonism  and the urge to use the word being in the thoughts of the later Lacan.

However, since for those who evolve in a Jewish or Islamic context the  Law  and  the  pre-eternal  meaning  are  given,  so  too  is  wujūd.  Wujūd  “is  a   gift,  which  is  Pure  Good.”70  This  is  why  ultimately  the  power  by  which  I   am a subject that can give a meaning to the series of affects that run on my  body are a “pure gift.” This would then also be a translation for wujūd that  might be better than “being” or “existence:” the gift by which this body is  aware of God’s meaningful presence. 

Both  intellectual  traditions  (Lacanian  and  Akbarian)  conceive  the  rela- tions between the inside and the outside as having the shape of a Möbius  strip.71 Nonetheless, for Lacan the strip’s movement is given by the attempt  to  find  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  Name-of-the-Father,  while  for   Ibn ‘Arabī it is moved by the intense love and meaningful compassion that  God has for the emptiness of the immutable essences that ask to be dressed  by His wujūd via His divine names. 
