has been challenged by Eric Winkel, who is currently translating the major  opus of Ibn ‘Arabī, The Meccan Openings. He has decided to translate the  word 'adam as “emptiness.”19 I defend Winkel’s decision because the word  “non-existence”  raises  a  series  of  contradictions  that  Ibn  ‘Arabī  could  not   have had in mind. If we read the book of Ibn ‘Arabī that comes the clos- est to a philosophical treatise, The Production of Circles, we encounter the  following statement: “Know that wujūd and ‘adam without a thing are not added  upon what is wujūd (mawjūd) and what is ‘adam (m‘adum), but rather it is wujūd  and ‘adam itself.” In order to illustrate this point Ibn ‘Arabī then writes: “Zayd is  mawjud in his essence in the market but is ‘adam (m‘adum) in his home.”20

The statement according to which a thing can be simultaneously a thing  that is mawjūd and a thing that is m‘adum needs to be at the centre of our  focus.  Indeed,  Ibn  ‘Arabī  argues  that  for  the  thing  to  be  simultaneously   in a state of wujūd and in a state of ‘adam, wujūd and ‘adam must not be  a  quality  of  the  thing.  If  they  were  a  quality,  then  the  law  of  contradic- tion would apply (the thing cannot be black and white at the same time).  However,  Ibn  ‘Arabī  declares  that  a  thing  can  be  by  its  very  essence   wujūd  and  ‘adam  simultaneously.  Now,  if  I  translate  ‘adam  with  non- existence I will necessarily be led to treat ‘adam as a quality that is added  to the essence and by which I qualify the essence of the thing that I am  describing and thus enter a set of contradictory statements. The sentence  about Zayd would then read like: “Zayd is existent in the market but non- existent at home.” Either Zayd is existent or he is non-existent. To be in a  place does not make him non-existent. What translators then usually do is  either add in brackets the expression “with regard to different relations”  or  the  words  “with  regard  to  time  and  place,”21  which  are  not  found  in   the  original  text.  In  this  way  they  separate  the  essence  of  Zayd  from  his   being-existent and being non-existent and thus do exactly the opposite of  what Ibn ‘Arabī is here teaching.22

f we now translate ‘adam with emptiness, as Winkel does, then the con- tradictions constructed by the translators simply disappear. We would then  read “Zayd is present in the market but in a state of (absolute) emptiness  in his home.” What makes this presence of Zayd in the market? The simple  fact  that  his  body  senses23  God’s  presence  in  the  market,  but  not  in  his   home. What is then the identity of the body in the emptiness that it senses  when it becomes aware of itself in this same void it has never left?

f there would be only void/emptiness then we would not be able to give  an  account  of  the  interactions  that  make  it  possible  for  void/emptiness  to   be  felt  and  experienced—that  is,  known  by  a  concrete  and  singular  body 
