left void, everything therefore fully held by the divine.”10 What is of impor- tance  here  is  that  in  a  Neoplatonist  framework,  this  void  and  emptiness   imply negative qualities that must be avoided. According to Plotinus, mat- ter is “no-thing,” “evil,” “feminine,” “measureless,” but this evilness is not  ontological,  simply  because  all  that  exists  participates  in  the  fundamental   goodness of the One. Matter is then an inverted mirror of the One which is  also “no-thing” and “measureless.”11 It is this inverted analogy that makes  the soul fear a sense of horror vacui while it flees towards the One: will it  go back to the nothingness (being without a form and thus stuck in the mud  of evil) it came from or reach the intelligence of the One? In the words of  Seidel:

> As it progresses towards the formless, says Plotinus, the soul fears that it will  meet nothingness (VI.9.3) the shapeless form of its origin: chaos. Contemplat- ing the ghostly shapeless form that would be matter or the shapeless form that  is the One could easily excite horror vacui, whichever emptiness or chaos that  might be.12 

Again emptiness is seen as a conceptual enemy that disturbs the spiritual  process  that  allows  me  to  move  towards  the  utter  perfection  of  the  One.   What  those  images  on  the  mirror  then  reflect  is  not  different  from  being   itself.  Matter  is  “non-being”  and  thus  a  “spectre  and  phantasm  of  bulk;  it   is a weak and pale ghost incapable of having a form.”13 In this sense, Ploti- nus’s philosophy is one that praises “autoeroticism,” in that the soul discov- ers first that the body is a reflection of its own light, while later it finds its  identity  in  its  being  a  diffraction  of  the  One.14  Or,  to  say  it  in  Levinassian   terms, the quest for the persistence into being is a quest for the persistence  of the extension of one’s identity over the disturbing presence of the other  that  faces  me  and  thus  asks  me  irredeemably  not  to  be,  but  rather  to  be   accountable for her/him

Now, a simple remark of Ibn ‘Arabī should already raise our attention to  the fact that his teachings do not praise the contemplation of pure being as  such as the most perfect spiritual vision one may receive. He writes:

> to envision a thing itself by itself is not analogous to envisioning it in another  matter/order  than  itself,  this  is  to  say  in  something  that  acts  as  a  mirror.   Indeed,  the  thing  that  acts  as  a  mirror  makes  apparent  to  the  thing  that  is   reflected its own ipseity in the shape of the place in which it is reflected.15

In  other  words,  the  shape  of  the  thing  that  acts  as  a  mirror  marks  a   place.  This  marking-the-place  signs  the  form  in  which  the  reflected  thing 
