envisions  itself.  Houria  Abdelouahed  has  shown—although  more  in  an   intuitive  way  than  through  a  clear-cut  demonstration—that  the  metaphor   of the mirror for Ibn ‘Arabī is not a narcissistic one (nor a plotinian one).  This is because the relation between the thing that is reflected and its own  reflection is less important for its own self-knowledge than the speech that  the breath of the reflected thing inscribes on the surface of the thing-that- acts-as-mirror.  It  is  through  that  speech  addressed  to  another-than-itself   that the reflected thing seizes its own identity.16

In order to clarify why Abdelouahed’s article breaks with the hegemonic  European interpretation of Ibn ‘Arabī it is first necessary to introduce the  reader  to  the  general  Western  view  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī’s  metaphysics.  On  the   Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy  website,  in  an  article  on  Ibn  ‘Arabī  written by William Chittick, we read the following

> Foremost among the technical terms of philosophy that Ibn ‘Arabī employs is  wujûd, existence or being, a word that had come to the centre of philosophi- cal  discourse  with  Avicenna.  In  its  Koranic  and  everyday  Arabic  sense,  wu- jûd means to find, come across, become conscious of, enjoy, be ecstatic. It was  used  to  designate  existence  because  what  exists  is  what  is  found  and  experi- enced. For Ibn ‘Arabī, the act of finding—that is, perception, awareness, and  consciousness—is never absent from the fact of being found.17 

Thus, according to Chittick, Ibn ‘Arabī identifies consciousness with being  through the concept of wujūd that he translates either as being or as exis- tence. In his book devoted to Ibn ‘Arabī, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, we  read  the  following  translation  of  a  short  text  written  by  Ibn  ‘Arabī  about   what is opposed to wujūd, this is to say ‘adam:

> The Real possesses the attribute of Being and the attribute of Necessary Be- ing through Himself. His contrary is called absolute non-existence (al-'adam  al-muṭlaq). . . . It is obvious that God creates the things and brings them out  of  non-existence  into  existence  .  .  .  the  apparent  situation  is  that  their  non- existence is a relative non-existence (‘adam al iḍafi).18 

What is clear from Chittick’s quotation is that Ibn ‘Arabī states that there  are  two  forms  of  ‘adam:  one  that  is  absolute  and  one  that  is  relative.  His   teachings  indeed  imply  that  each  singular  and  concrete  thing  that  is  per- ceived has an immutable essence in God’s eternal science—that is, that it  has never left the relative ‘adam to which it belongs and is not identical to  an  absolute  ‘adam  from  which  nothing  could  emerge.  Yet  this  translation 
