kabbalists.”56  However,  it  is  then  only  ten  years  later,  on  3  March  1972   that  Lacan  attempts  finally  to  step  out  of  a  late  occultist  worldview  based   on the Name-of the-Father: “I have been on the path of the Name-of-the- Father. . . . But, I will never do this again.” To understand this remark, we  need  to  introduce  the  second  form  of  mysticism  that  Lacan  presented  in   his seminars.

The pure signifier “revealed Law” casts outside of its remit the desire for  a perfect symmetry between the masculine position that aims at controlling  the  whole-of-knowledge  and  the  feminine  position  that  constantly  eludes   this control.57 This second form of mysticism is particularly evident in the  seminar The Other Side of Psychoanalysis (1969–1970), when Lacan com- ments  on  the  history  of  the  biblical  prophet  Hosea.  The  Torah  here  nar- rates  the  story  of  the  prophet  Hosea  who  has  married  a  sacred  prostitute   who thus praises her divinity though sexual rites. He orders her to repent.  This matrimonial relation is transmuted into a spiritual hermeneutics of the  relation between God and Israel. God’s unconditional love for His people  is such that he keeps the door of repentance always open even when they  do  praise  other  divinities  through  sexual  rites.  What  thus  strikes  Lacan  in   this story is the very fact that YHWH does not want to know anything about  sexual sacred rites. In fact, as Lacan observes, YHWH seems to be the only  divinity of these times that does not want to know anything about sex. 

YHWH makes four commands that indicate how strongly He rejects the  present state of the people of Israel who practice sexual magical rites: (1)  Hosea must call his son Jezrael because He will put an end to the house of  Israel; (2) Hosea must call his daughter Ruhama (which means “not cher- ished”) because YHWH no longer cherishes the house of Israel; (3) Hosea  must  call  his  last  son  Lo-Ammi  (“not  my  people”)  because  the  house  of   Israel is no longer His people; and (4) the deeds of prostitution undertaken  by  Hosea’s  wife—and  thus  the  people  of  Israel  who  praise  other  divini- ties—must be shown in broad daylight. It is only once these four commands  are  enacted  that  YHWH  will  bring  back  in  the  solitude  of  the  desert  His   people  so  that  they  may  repent  and  answer  positively  His  love:  “You  will   then  call  me  ‘My  Spouse’  and  no  more  ‘My  Baal’”  (Hosea  2:18).  In  the   conversation  between  the  scholar  of  the  Torah  Caquot  and  Lacan  in  the   1969–1970 seminar, the former notes that the formula for “My Spouse” is  Ish, which is not gendered, while Baal means the “Master” and its feminine  “Beoula” has the meaning of a woman who is in need of a husband. It is this  thought that stands behind the following remark by Lacan about the God of  Hosea: “There is one sure thing, all relations with women are outside the  Law.”58  In  other  words,  the  pure  signifier  of  the  revealed  Law  leaves  the 
