From this formal point of view, Lacan’s anti-philosophy is still, even in his later days, marked by a hidden quest for the Name-of-the-Father.  In fact, he  praises Joyce for inventing his genealogy, namely, for creating a new master  signifier that empowers his creative drive which ties together the Real (that  constantly  disrupts  the  totality  I  believe  in),  the  Imaginary  (the  belief  in  a   closed  totality)  and  the  Symbolic  (the  objects  that  populate  this  totality)   which structure his mind. In the seminar The Sinthome (1975–1976), Lacan  states that even if Joyce rejected his father because he never acted as a father  to  him,  through  his  literary  style  Joyce  was  able  to  reinvent  new  meanings   associated with his proper noun and thus treat it as a common noun. In this  sense,  the  sound  of  his  proper  noun  becomes  a  new  master-signifier  and   thus a compensation for the loss of his father. In other words, the name-of- the-father once lost comes back into the game through the hidden door of  Joyce’s  capacity  to  glide  on  the  meanings  of  his  proper  name:  “The  noun   which is his, this is what he values at the expense of his father.”69 Yet, this  autoproductive subjectivity can function only if I become father of my own  subjectivity. This is where one still finds a trace of Plotinian Neoplatonism  and the urge to use the word being in the thoughts of the later Lacan.

However, since for those who evolve in a Jewish or Islamic context the  Law  and  the  pre-eternal  meaning  are  given,  so  too  is  wujūd.  Wujūd  “is  a   gift,  which  is  Pure  Good.”70  This  is  why  ultimately  the  power  by  which  I   am a subject that can give a meaning to the series of affects that run on my  body are a “pure gift.” This would then also be a translation for wujūd that  might be better than “being” or “existence:” the gift by which this body is  aware of God’s meaningful presence. 

Both  intellectual  traditions  (Lacanian  and  Akbarian)  conceive  the  rela- tions between the inside and the outside as having the shape of a Möbius  strip.71 Nonetheless, for Lacan the strip’s movement is given by the attempt  to  find  a  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  Name-of-the-Father,  while  for   Ibn ‘Arabī it is moved by the intense love and meaningful compassion that  God has for the emptiness of the immutable essences that ask to be dressed  by His wujūd via His divine names. 
