that speaks in a clear way about its essence. Our bodies would feel differ- ent  sets  of  affects  while  holding  to  the  position  that  these  feelings  are  an   illusion.  The  body  in  its  emptiness  would  state  that  it  is  both  an  illusion   and a tangible reality. This is an antinomy from which we cannot escape if  we accept that there is only emptiness. The way out of this antinomy is to  accept the idea that I can only understand myself through the speech and  meaning  that  is  given  to  me  in  my  interactions  with  others.  The  simple   experience  that  proves  this  point  is  given  by  the  fact  that  I  cannot  feel  at   once  the  totality  of  my  body.  It  is  only  by  watching  the  body’s  reflection,   feeling  the  touch  of  the  other  and  finally  being  addressed  by  the  speech   of the one that gazes at me that I start knowing my own body. This is the  reason why in an Islamic context the contemplation of the God that speaks  and  thus  socially  organises  the  letters  of  the  Qur’an  is  perceived  as  being   more perfect than the silent mental image of the Self of the First Principle  that is contemplated by philosophers and ascetics.24

In  order  to  further  develop  this  thought,  we  must  focus  our  attention   on a second term that challenges western Christian and Aristotelian logics.  The notion of ijād shares with the term wujūd the same linguistic root. It is  thus often translated with the term “existentiation.”25 Ibn ‘Arabī has written  a book whose purpose is to help the disciple put into practice the spiritual- ity he is teaching. In this small work, The Book on the Secret of the Divine  Names, he comments on every divine name by describing how it rules the  life of the disciple and what use he can make of this divine name to reach  the  knowledge  of  God’s  supreme  Ipseity.  We  find  in  the  chapter  devoted   to  the  name  The  Creator  the  following  opening  sentence:  “The  Creator   predetermines the things before he existentiates (ijād) their essences, after  that  they  are  in  a  state  of  wujūd  (mawjūd)  in  the  second  degree  of  their   determination.”26  What  this  sentence  entails  is  that  Allah  first  expresses   His  concern  for27  the  immutable  essences  (He  addresses  their  singular   realities)  and  then  determines  their  form  (their  capacity  to  receive  God’s  light that enables each one of these things to perceive and feel its identity).  When these essences are only in the intention of God they are not aware of  the emptiness in which they find themselves in, while when they receive a  form—a body that feels the reality of itself and of the other than itself—they  start to become aware of the emptiness in which they find themselves in. 

But what does the power of ijād bring forth? It brings forth a pre-created  synthetic  and  folded  meaning  that  can  be  understood  only  if  it  is  experi- enced with a whole body that becomes aware of all its nuances through all  of its senses. What the body then does is to unfold the pre-created meaning  it carries through its entire existence, while bringing it back to its first issuer.
