been a Plotinian Neoplatonist, he would have manipulated the impossible  as a notion that refers to that which cannot be by nature, or by necessity,  or  by  circumstances.40  But  this  is  not  the  case  for  Ibn  ‘Arabī,  the  Shaykh   al-Akbar. His treatment of the impossible makes it something that is active  in its constantly limiting the shapes of the forms that are uplifted by God’s  wujūd.  The  “impossible”  for  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is  the  “thing  that  cannot  receive   wujūd.”41  Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  speak  about  the  “impossible”  and   thus to use it actively to circumscribe an argument by saying: “Suppose the  impossible.” When my speech acts in this way it gives, in Ibn ‘Arabī’s words,  a “presence to the impossible.”42 We have stated before that the experience  of sharing with God a common meaning as such has a stronger perfection  than the act of only experiencing emptiness as such. This is why the argu- ment on the presence of the “impossible” is of such importance. It comes  directly from the Qur’an and follows those verses in which God describes  impossible situations so as to encourage His believers to be thankful: “Had  there  been  in  these  two  (the  heaven  and  the  earth)  other  gods  (as  well)   apart from Allah, then both would have been destroyed.”43 Thus, if we are  able to give presence to the impossible, then this very act of speech is that  which makes it possible for an unfolded meaning to become an articulated  and  clear  speech  in  which  words  are  distinguished  from  another.44  The   impossible  is  then  the  absolute  ‘adam  upon  which  God  reflects  Himself,   a  reflection  that  is  best  grasped  and  tasted  in  the  mirror  of  Muhammad.   Following the translation of Winkel, we would say that the “impossible” is  the effective “light-blocker”45 that makes it possible to speak about the limit  between different things, and thus to transform a pre-created synthetic and  singularising meaning that is associated with each one of our essences into,  in the world of bodies, an articulated speech. 

# TWO FORMS OF MYSTICISM

Knowing that our European languages are heavily influenced by a modern  grammar and philosophy that adhere to the knot Being&Conciousness, how  can  we  poetically  transform  our  languages  so  that  we  might  get  nearer  to   the teachings of Ibn ‘Arabī that work through Wujūd&’Adam&Awareness?

Lacan  draws  a  distinction  between  two  forms  of  mysticism.  The  first  is   what  he  calls  occultism,  while  the  second  is  a  mysticism  of  the  Law.  Ibn   ‘Arabī had been introduced in France and the United States in the twen- tieth  century  through  a  modern  occultism  (foremost  that  of  Ivan  Aguéli
