How  does  Ibn  ‘Arabī  explicate  this  idea?  In  the  book  quoted  before,   The Production of Circles, he invents a myth that has the function of illus- trating his teachings on the divine names. At the outset of this myth, each  single divine name finds itself having keys that would entitle it to exert its  authority on something. But, at this moment of the myth, not a single name  is  confronted  with  the  thing  that  receives  its  authority.  Therefore,  all  the   divine names are not aware of the full meaning of their authorities. This is  why all the divine names moved towards the name Allah and “asked for the  wujūd of the Heavens and the Earth until they would be able to put the key  in the right door.”28 What ijād thus brings forth is a meaning, if by meaning  we intend the following: a given combination of divine names that exercise  a specific authority on a single body, which thus expresses the effects of the  divine initial intention addressed to its immutable essence and the rule that  has  combined  these  same  divine  names  in  this  specific  manner.  It  is  then   the mission of man to formulate a personal clear language by emulating the  clearest language of all: the Qur’an. Man becomes aware of his mission in  the  emptiness  in  which  he  finds  himself.  In  other  words,  we  could  define   ijād with the following: the power by which a body becomes aware of a pre- eternal meaning that is addressed to its singularity. 

However,  what  this  definition  leaves  unexplained  is  what  “awareness”  here entails for a specific meaning.

# AWARENESSES AND MAKING ThE “IMPOSSIBlE” PRESENT

“Consciousness”  is  a  Western  conceptual  construction  that  dates  at  least   from  the  nineteenth  century.29  Applying  consciousness  to  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is   anachronistic and misleading. What we have instead is a topology of aware- nesses  that  the  body  feels  along  its  path  towards  the  experience  of  God’s  utmost Reality.

One  of  the  most  important  books  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī  is  the  Fusus  al-Hikam.  Each chapter of this book is devoted to the wisdom of a specific prophet.  The  first  chapter  is  devoted  to  Adam,  while  the  last  chapter  is  devoted  to   Muhammad, who, in the Islamic tradition designates the one that encom- passes  the  perfections  of  all  previous  prophets  and  by  his  own  incompa- rability  fully  abrogates  the  laws  and  spiritual  pedagogies  related  to  those   laws  that  are  now  bygone.  As  God  cannot  be  known  in  His  own  Ipseity,   that  perfection  is  achieved  for  the  one  that  sees  God  in  the  mirror  of  the   muhammadian presence. The mirror is not understood by the Shaykh, Ibn  ‘Arabī, as a projection of the identical. The mirror is rather a place where
