gap  that  separates  the  whole-that-is  (the  feminine  position  of  the  bodies   that eludes the political power that wants to control them or Beoula) from  the  whole-that-is-known  (the  masculine  position  that  tries  to  organise  the   bodies  according  to  its  own  philosophical  categories,  Baal)  open  without   ever trying to suture them, without conflating one with the other.

Why is this the case? Because the revealed Law is commented upon in  such  a  way  that  no  content  ever  closes  its  signification.  Instead,  the  Law   operates  as  the  abundance  of  signifying  meaning.  This  is  the  reason  why   God is not interested in any sexual magical rite, as these seek to theopoliti- cally suture the whole-that-is (Beoula) with the whole-that-is-known (Baal). 

Plotinian Neoplatonism as described by Sedgwick in its modern reception  shares with modern occultism the same psychological apparatus that is driven  by  the  horror  vacui  and  the  quest  for  a  master  that  stabilises  by  his  own   embodiment the whole-of-knowledge of the disciple—that is, that enacts the  Name-of-the-Father.  Late  occultism  makes  an  important  use  of  the  myth   of the Androgyne in which by an inner meditation the disciple becomes the  passive “feminine” aspect of the “primordial nature” that is fully grasped by  the reality of the Self and its universal intellect. This universal intellect is fully  displayed in the words and actions of the late occultist master as he is both  the  “uncreated  soul”  and  the  “active  and  detached  soul.”59  In  this  sense,  it   might well be said that modern occultism is a backlash of the sacred of Baal  and Beoula that has been first abolished by Judaism.60

But  once  the  belief  in  this  Big  Other  (the  construction  of  a  socially   embedded  mind  that  believes  that  there  is  somewhere  a  gaze  that  orders   my  thought  in  a  closed  totality  so  that  it  can  fit  the  actual  socio-political   order of things) embodied in the body of the modern-late-occultist-master  evaporates in thin air, the belief in being is gone. Being was only the signi- fier that in our European languages urged the disciple to look for the body  that enfleshes the fictitious whole-of-knowledge of the disciple in the first  place. For Lacan:

> being as such has no meaning at all. Yes, there where we find the word “be- ing”  it  becomes  the  master-signifier  as  the  philosophical  discourse  shows  so   well  that  in  order  to  be  at  the  service  of  being  and  to  be  brilliant,  this  is  to   say  pretty,  it  finds  itself  being  only  a  signifier  that  constantly  plays  the  role   of the master-subject (signifiant m’être61). A Master-subject that is infinitely  redoubled in its mirrors.62

If  there  is  no  being  for  Lacan,  what  does  the  one  that  is  no  more  cling   to?  To  what  Lacan  understands  as  the  Thing:  that  is,  that  which  arouses   my  desire,  but  nonetheless  is  nowhere  to  be  found.  The  Thing  marks  the 
