the vacuity of one’s self leaves a delimited place for the synthetic and folded  meanings that come from God to occur and thus take a constructed gram- matical form. In this sense, the mirror is not a narcissistic metaphor, but one  that leaves the possibility open for a meeting with the other-than-myself. 

This  point  becomes  evident  if  we  compare  the  contemplation  of  God   in  the  mirror  of  Adam  with  the  contemplation  of  God  in  Muhammad’s  mirror  while  focusing  on  what  forms  of  awarennesses  these  two  different   contemplations entail. In the chapter devoted to Adam, the affects that are  evoked refer to a sensation that is felt on the surface of the skin “and they  did  not  feel/become  aware,30  (wa  hum  lā  yash'urūn,  which  here  is  about   the angels that do not know all the names that God has given to Adam); or  affects  that  are  perceived  by  the  speculative  mind  that  draws  analogies  to   produce universal ideas “fī‘l dhihn”;31 or a form of perception that literally  grasps  the  thing  that  it  intends  to  perceive  “idrak”  (here  referring  to  the   fact  that  the  world  is  not  able  to  know  its  subtle  relation  with  the  Real  in   the same way He understands it).32 In the chapter devoted to Muhammad,  the senses refer to an act of testifying to the Truth that is related to a pas- sage in the Qur’an which narrates the vision of God that innocents experi- ence during their martyrdom.33 Along with this act of vision (mushāhadat)34  of God beyond any comparison, we find such faculties as the sight of God  in  the  world  of  analogies,35  the  fragrance  of  fine  perfume  and  the  taste  of   the good things36 that guide the servant on the right path, and, finally, the  hearing of the conversation between God and His servant.37 All these five  faculties guide humans towards the knowledge of God’s Ipseity. How? By  contemplating the power of God’s first injunction in which His concern for  the immutable essences is felt. The word that means either order or affair  (amr)  occurs  three  times  in  this  chapter,38  while  three  is  also  the  number   that  Ibn  ‘Arabī  attributes  to  Muhammad.  It  is  then  not  only  a  body  that   feels with all its senses God’s Ipseity while contemplating His Ipseity in the  mirror of Muhammad, but, above all, it is a body that has become able to  be empowered by the supreme divine order and thus be accountable for all  creation before God. This body has the power to shape its affects according  to the prophetic revealed Law and its social interactions through the spoken  words of the Qur’an.39

If the thing that receives wujūd is delimited and the One that emits the  meanings that are carried by the thing is unlimited, what is the identity of  the limit that shapes the form of the thing that is delimited? It is here that  Ibn ‘Arabī’s insights on the “impossible” bring his entire thought one step  further away from a Plotinian-like way of thinking. If Ibn ‘Arabī would have 
