
* Finally,  in  the  same  way  that  God  pours  out  His  universal  mercy  on   mankind,  Muhammad  is  an  exception  that,  because  he  is  an  excep- tion, is able to work as a mercy to the worlds (in a Lacanian language  we would say that the plural “worlds” tell us that he is the not-all that  eludes  the  oppressive  position  that  tries  to  close  in  one  totality  all- that-is  by  forcefully  giving  it  the  shape  of  the  whole-that-is-known):   “Indeed,  in  this  [Qu’ran]  is  notification  for  a  worshipping  people.   And We have not sent you, [O Muhammad], except as a mercy to the  worlds” (21:106–7).

These  three  analogies  between  God  and  Muhammad  show  us  that  the   position of the Name-of-the-Father is always disrupted in favour of a mercy  that  flows  through  the  opened  gap  between  the  whole-that-is-known  and   the  whole-that-is-open.  This  act  cracks  a  breach  in  the  mind  of  the  late   modern individual who until now wrongly tried to construct a perfect sym- metry  between  being  and  consciousness.  Finally,  this  same  breach  allows   her now to taste the real emptiness that she has never left.

# On the difference between Lacan and Ibn Arabi

What  is  the  fundamental  difference  between  Lacan  and  our  contempo- rary  interpretation  of  Ibn  ‘Arabī’s  teachings  when  it  comes  to  combining   the  signifiers  Emptiness&Revealed  Law&Body?  First,  we  need  to  state   the  immediate  and  obvious  difference.  Both  answer  the  same  transhis- torical  question68—how  is  it  possible  to  feel  emptiness?—but  within  dif- ferent  intellectual  contexts  that  respond  to  a  different  set  of  questions   and  answers.  The  fundamental  problem  that  marks  European  modernity   and  from  which  Lacan  never  entirely  steps  out  of  is:  “How  can  I  find  an   identity  between  being  and  consciousness,  or  rather,  establish  the  knot   Being&Consciousness?” Any answer to a secondary philosophical problem  is marked by the quest to answer this absolutely unanswerable question. On  the other hand, all answers given by Ibn ‘Arabī to such secondary questions  are answers to another unanswerable question, namely: “How do I find an  identity between the way-of-being in the world according to the Law that  establishes  one  that  gives  the  Law  and  another  one  that  abides  by  it,  and   the way-of-being in the world according to the absolute Unity of God which  somehow must exclude any other ontological reality?” Nonetheless, we can  compare  these  two  very  different  contexts  through  a  purely  formal  ques- tion: Around which pivot do Lacan and Ibn ‘Arabī ultimately make the knot  Emptiness&Revealed Law&Body turn?
