The world around 1500 was 'polycentric and non-capitalist',19 with several coexisting civilizations - the Ming Huangdinate, the Ottoman Sultanate, the Mughal Empire, the Oyo and Benin kingdoms of the Yoruba nation in Africa, the Incas in Tawantinsuyu, and the Aztecs in Anahuac. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, the world is monocentric, interconnected by a single type of economy, capitalism; the violence of colonial practices has ravaged the world, which is now marked by a diversity of political theories and practices. In between these two scenarios, 'modernity' enters as a double colonisation of time and space. A structure of control and management has emerged, of 'authority, economy, subjectivity, gender and sexual norms', driven by the exploitation of labour and the expropriation of land.20

According to Nelson Maldonaldo-Torees a serious engagement with spirituality is a dstinguishing feature of decolonial - as opposed to postcolonial - thought. Mignolo himself is not interseted in drawing sharp lines of division between decolonial and postcolonial thought. he sees both as 'options' that can coexist, and as having different trajectories in terms of points of origin and linguistic fields, and therefore different areas of concern.21 But he does outline the 'spiritual option' as one of the trajectories that decolnial thinking will have to take seriously in the coming decades as it challenges both secular modernity/coloniality, and also the colonisation of institutionalised religions.22 Maldonaldo-Torres sees this as a distinctive feature of decolonial thinking for, while postcolonial studies emerge from and are located in the academic field of the secular humanities, decolnial thinking has not been an academic discipline alone: it has included community activists, artists, and scholars critical of modern Western secularism who have drawn from and contributed to religious studies as well.

It is from this perspective that Maldonaldo-Torees reads Fanon as offering a critique of the coloniality of the religion/secularism divide.

19. Ibid.: 3

20. Ibid.: 7

21. Ibid.: xxvii.

22. Ibid.: 33-4. 
