Rejecting the understanding of Fanon as a secularist philosopher, Maldonaldo-Torres insists Fanon did not believe that overcoming religion is a necessary for decolonisation to take place, or that decolonisation would lead to religionless soceity. This is reflected, he says, in a paper Fanon co-wrote with an intern, Jacques Azoulay, while Fanon was Director of the Blida Psychiatric Hospital in Algeria. The paper warns psychiatrists and other scientists that while 'some conducts, some reactions can appear 'primitive' to us ... that is only a value judgement, one that is both questionable and bears on poorly defined characteristics.' The authors were, in particular, referring to the idea that 'genies'(jinn) produce madness, a belief prevalent in Algeria.23 Maldonlado-Torres concludes that Fanon's 'view of the self as a gift and his intersubjective account of healthy individuality and social relations, draw from and are compatible with a large variety of sources, including so-called religious or spiritual formations.'24 Fanon's decolonial thinking should therefore be related to 'non-secular or post-secular accounts of reality, including the African diaspora spiritualities that are found in Fanon's own island of Martinique and through the Caribbean, some of which probably informed Fanon's thinking and worldview too.' It seems, too, that Fanon is read quite widely as a critic of the coloniality of secularism among militant intellectuals in the Indigenous communities of South America.25 

In a similar move, but from a position different from that of Mignolo, Achille Mbembe reasserts a 'critical and inclusive universalism' as the 'latest avatar of a certain tradition of Western humanism.' In an interview around his book, Brutalisme(2020), Mbembe reflects on the shift that has taken place from the beginning of modernity - when 'the sharp separation between the world of humans and the world of objects' was an emancipatory move - to the current moment when what 'prevails is the idea that the human is the product of technology' and '[e]verything, including consciousness itself, is

23. I will engaged with this idea at some length in ch. 4.

24. Maldonaldo-Torres 2022.

25. Ibid.
