being reduced to matter.'26 Mbembe terms this the 'new secular religion,' counterposing to it the non-dichotomy of precolonial African and Amerindian metaphysics which enables us to 'de-dramatize the human/object relationship.'27 At the same time Mbembe is concerned that the 'critique of reason' should not become 'a war against reason', and it is in this context that he asserts the new critical universalism.

In the present book I attempt to assert multiple notions of reason and unreason, as well as a somewhat suspicious attitude towards universalism. The point, however, that emerges from these different sets of not necessarily congruent arguments is the idea of 'applying theory' produced in one context to 'understand practice' in another assumes that 'politcal practice' is 'non-theoretical' - completely bereft of any discursive-theoretical content - so that any theory (from the West) can be used to make sense of politcal practice anywhere. But, as some of us argued in an earlier work, all political practice is always constituted by some form of reflection and thought - theoretical or non-theoretical - and, as we realise today, at leasst one part of theorisation must be abou making sense of 'practice' through an understanding of the subject's own world and her categories of thought.28

What these layered discussion indicate is that the dichotomies of universal/particular, east/west, and tradition/modernity are articulated in far more complex ways than their invocations often imply.

26. Mbembe 2022: 129.

27. Ibid.: 130

28. Menon, Nigam, and Palshikar 2014.
