# Islam and the Baha'i Faith

## Oliver Scharbrodt

## IBSN: 978–0–203–92857–8

In early August 1887, several Beirut newspapers announced the departure of ‘the famous Abbas Effendi al-Irani’, 1 who left the city heading towards Akka, the former crusader fortress in Palestine. During his stay in Beirut,  Abbas Effendi met ulama ̄ -, notables and government officials ‘who flocked to  visit him spending the whole night talking with him under the moonlight’. 2 The newspaper announcements are not short of his praise. They describe the impact he had on the people he met during his visit, people who were impressed by both his immense knowledge and his extraordinary personality, ‘for he had such good character traits that he had won over the hearts immediately and made friendship to him an absolute priority’. 3 Abbas Effendi, more commonly known as Abdul-Baha, had arrived in Beirut in late June 1887.4 Not much is known of the purpose of this visit to Beirut apart from the constant stream of visitors to him consisting of ‘the great men of the city’. 5 Among the many men he met, one name, however, is known: Muhammad Abduh.

Muhammad Abduh (1849–1905), the Egyptian-born Muslim reformer exiled to Beirut at that time, had been famed for his opposition to the British occupation of his country in 1882. Together with his mentor and teacher Jamalud-Din al-Afghani (1838–97), he published the anti-British journal Al- Urwa al-Wuthqa ̄ (The Firmest Bond) in Paris, before he settled in Beirut in 1885. One of his students in Beirut, Shakib Arslan (1869–1946), who later  became famous as an Ottoman politician and Arab nationalist, briefly men- tions in his account of Abduh’s stay in Beirut the encounter between his  teacher and Abdul-Baha which must have taken place some time between late June and early August 1887:

> None of the notables or his acquaintances journeyed to Beirut without coming to greet him. He honoured and exalted each one and, even if he conflicted with him in belief, he did not cease to respect him. Foremost among those he honoured was Abbas Effendi al-Baha, the leader of Babism (al-ba ̄ biyya), even though the Babi creed (al-t ̇  arı ̄qa al-ba ̄ biyya) is  different from what the shaykh believes and is the creed (t  ̇  arı ̄qa) that al- Sayyid Jamalud-Din refuted so strongly. But he revered Abbas Effendi’s knowledge, refinement, distinction, and high moral standards and Abbas Effendi similarly honoured Abduh.6 

Abdul-Baha Abbas Effendi (1844–1921) was an Ottoman prisoner at the time of his visit to Beirut. He was the son of the founder of the Baha i Faith, Mirza Husayn Ali Nuri Baha ullah (1817–92) who was exiled from Iran to the Ottoman Empire.

Shakib Arslan notes the differences between Abduh and Abdul-Baha in terms of their religious beliefs. Abduh, the Sunni scholar and reformer,  appears to be miles away theologically from Abdul-Baha, leader of a so- called heretical movement whose founder claims to be a new prophet after  Muhammad. Nevertheless, according to Arslan, the two men held each other in high esteem. But was their encounter in Beirut just accidental? Was their good rapport solely based on the mutual appreciation of their knowledge and characters? Was Abduh aware at all of Abdul-Baha’s affiliation with the Babis? Or did the two men meet in Beirut because they shared more with each other than their common mutual admiration? It will be shown that Abduh met the famous Iranian from Akka at a time when their paths not only crossed accidentally, but when their lives and careers were at an important crossroad which connected both for a moment but led to the parting of their ways in the future.

# Millenarianism and reform in the nineteenth century

Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh belonged to the same generation of Middle Easterners who witnessed the demise of the traditional socio-political order within the region and the questioning of traditional Muslim religiosity  as preserved by its guardians, the ulama ̄ -. The two men were not only passive  observers of the unfolding events but also responded to these changes and tried to influence developments with their own efforts. They lived in a time when the intrusion of Western modernity into the Middle East gained an unprecedented momentum. An increasing awareness of the scientific, military, economic and political dominance of Europe initially triggered responses from Middle Eastern rulers to modernise their countries.

The first state which responded to the supremacy of Europe and initiated a modernisation process was the Ottoman Empire. The period of the Tanz ̇ ı ̄ma ̄ t reforms (1839–76), a series of governmental and legal reforms aiming at  modernising the Ottoman Empire, constituted the beginning of the modern- isation of the Middle East. As the ideological and administrative backbone to  this modernisation policy, the Ottoman sultans sent young diplomats to Europe to build a new Western-educated elite, who would spearhead and formulate the reforms. The Tanz ̇  ı ̄ma ̄ t reforms gave the impetus for the mod- ernisation of Middle Eastern societies and created the intellectual climate for  the acceptance of European ideas and values. The government officials who had been sent to Europe not only returned with the necessary skills to ensure
the administrative centralisation of the Ottoman Empire but also carried  with them the ideas of European liberalism with notions of popular sover- eignty, constitutionalism and parliamentary democracy.7  Egypt followed the example of the Ottoman Empire and sent young, bright men on educational missions to Europe and supported the creation of Western-style educational  institutions in order to yield a new Western-educated elite for the modernisa- tion of the Middle East.

The ulama ̄ -experienced the new modernisation drive of the secular rulers  as a disruptive force, interfering in their traditional domains of education and law, and depriving them of both the economic and the intellectual sources of  their authority in the long term. In the Ottoman Empire the ulama ̄ -consti- tuted a kind of aristocratic class closely connected with the bureaucratic  apparatus of the government. They provided judges, scribes and other gov- ernment officials and the graduates of their educational institutions had pro- vided the educated elite, governing the country. In the past, secular rulers  turned to them for advice and guidance. Now under the new direction of state administration, they lent their ears to foreign advisors and bureaucrats with secular training. The conservative intellectual climate of the madrasa, which were completely ignored in the drive to modernise educational institutions,  generated ulama ̄ -who were increasingly hostile to the modernisation of  their societies. The ulama ̄ -became an endangered elite and had to realise that  their education was rendered useless in the new modern state bureaucracy. Whereas the state and the new class of modern bureaucrats constituted a group open to change and to the adoption of Western ideas and concepts, the  intellectual orientation of the ulama ̄ -was characterised by conservatism and  aimed to preserve the status quo. 8  Ideologically, reforms were branded as un- Islamic and foreign in origin. However, from a non-ideological perspective,  the ulama ̄ ’s opposition to such reforms stemmed from their legitimate fear of losing their traditional authority in the new socio-political orders which Middle Eastern rulers were so keen to establish.9

Criticism of the nature of the reforms came also from the agents of those reforms themselves. An increasing number of Middle Eastern intellectuals  who came in contact with European thought grew dissatisfied with the direc- tion of the reforms undertaken by the ruling elites. For them, military and  administrative reforms alone were not sufficient and wider-reaching reforms needed to be accomplished. The rulers were interested in creating a powerful, centralised state. Their reform initiatives were often intended to consolidate their autocratic rule. Economic prosperity was sought through establishing  commercial links with Europe and by inviting European advisors to the coun- try. Both the apparent autocracy of Middle Eastern rulers and their increas- ing foreign dependence alienated a number of intellectuals and members of  the state bureaucracy who more and more demanded the introduction of  democratic reforms and the independence from foreign influence. As the for- eign domination of the Middle East gained further momentum in the latter  half of the nineteenth century, many intellectuals and bureaucrats assumed a
dissident stance towards the regimes in the Middle East opposing their col- laboration with European powers and their utter absolutism. Political liberal- isation was seen as means of gaining independence from both foreign influence  and indigenous autocratic rule.

Intellectually, these reformers had to formulate a position of dissidence against the Middle Eastern sovereigns, who increasingly turned into local agents of European colonialism, and against conservative forces within the religious establishment which denounced any engagement with the modern world as being contrary to the basic tenets of the Islamic tradition. Accusing Middle Eastern regimes of blindly imitating European ideas and concepts, these reformers felt the need for an intellectual reconciliation of such ideas with the Islamic tradition. By tracing modern ideas back to Islam, they could  argue against the conservative opposition to them and against the over- reliance of Middle Eastern regimes on the West. The intellectual reconcili- ation of Islam with modernity would show that neither was it necessary to  collaborate with European powers for the implementation of such reforms nor were they in contradiction to Islam.

Who had the intellectual resources for a thorough reconsideration of the  Islamic tradition? The mainstream of the ulama ̄ -was conservative in attitude  and opposed the adoption of Western ideas as part of the modernisation  process for ideological and non-ideological reasons. As most of the ulama ̄ -were rather unwilling to engage intellectually with the modern world, their  monopoly on religious discourse was challenged by a new class of intel- lectuals who, often coming from a traditional religious background, adopted  a religious tone to justify the introduction of reforms. Many reformers began with a self-reflective analysis of the state of the Muslim world and the reasons for its weakness. This self-diagnosis implied a critique of traditional religious  authority. The ulama ̄ -were blamed for the demise of Islam in the modern  world because their strict adherence to a medieval and outdated scholarly tradition had led to the intellectual stagnation of Muslims. The nature of religious authority was put under scrutiny due to the perceived decline of  Islam attributed to the shortcomings of the religious and political establish- ment. Reformers therefore became both political and religious dissidents and  positioned themselves in opposition to the establishment, asking such ques- tions as: What intellectual traditions of political and religious dissent does  Islam offer? Which alternative models of religious authority allow a creative reinterpretation of the Islamic tradition?

# Origins of religio-political dissent in Islamic messianism


Throughout the history of Islam, dissident movements have opposed the  religious and political establishment. In the same manner as religious dissi- dents had challenged the authority of the ulama ̄ -in the past, nineteenth- century reformers considered traditional Islam as represented by the ulama ̄ -to have fallen short of responding adequately to the challenges of the modern
Figure  1.1 The Middle EAst in the late nineteenth century
world. As intellectuals and bureaucrats in the nineteenth century who fought  against absolutist rule and European colonialism in the Middle East, revo- lutionary movements in Islamic history have combated political regimes  which were perceived as being corrupt, autocratic and immoral. Very often such movements which attached themselves to notions of religo-political authority were felt to be more authentically Islamic.

Since the revolt of Mukhtar al-Thaqafi (685–6) in the name of Muham- mad ibn al-Hanafiyya al-Mahdi -(‘the rightly-guided one’), religious and pol- itical dissent in Islam has found one expression in movements around the  Mahdi, the saviour who would restore Islam and bring true guidance for the Muslim community. The Mahdi, as the divinely appointed charismatic leader of the community, would initiate a return to the perfection of the prophetic age and revive pure and authentic Islam as it existed at the time of the Prophet Muhammad. From the time that Mukhtar revolted against the Umayyad caliph and chose a son of Ali ibn Abi Talib as the right leader of the Muslim community, Mahdis and their messianic movements have appeared in Islamic history as forces of opposition and dissent against the religious and political establishment of their times.

Originally, al-Mahdi -was a political title designating the rightly-guided  leader of the Muslim community who would restore justice and oppose the illegitimate usurpers to the caliphate as embodied by the Umayyad dynasty. The hope for the arrival of such a leader was particularly strong among the early Shia which was in its infancy, a political movement in support of the leadership claims of a member of the Hashimid clan, the clan of the Prophet Muhammad. It was believed that the Mahdi by virtue of being part of the ahl al-bayt, the family of the Prophet, partakes of his charisma and therefore would rule in a similar fashion as the Prophet had. Mukhtar’s revolt in the name of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya initiated a series of Hashimid revolts in the name of or led by a member of the clan of the Prophet. The revolt, which was eventually successful and which overthrew the Umayyad dynasty, resulted  in the Abbasid Revolution of 750. Being descendents of Muhammad’s pater- nal uncle Abbas and therefore members of the Hashimid clan, the Abbasids  appealed to Shii sentiments of religio-political leadership by a member of the family of the Prophet and exploited the notion of a return (dawla) to the prophetic age in their propaganda.10 Once the Abbasids assumed power, they adopted messianic names like al-Saffah, al-Mansur or al-Mahdi as part of their caliphal titles in order to express their charismatic authority.11

Once in power, however, the Abbasids launched severe persecutions against the Shia, seeing them as potential sources for political dissent, who might challenge the Abbasid rule by putting forward a claimant to the leadership who may have been more closely related to the Prophet or even be one of his  direct descendants. The Abbasids turned to the ulama ̄ -and patronised the  formation and consolidation of Sunni Islam which took shape with the com- pilation of canonical traditions attributed to the Prophet, and the emergence  of Islamic jurisprudence and Islamic theology. The ulama ̄ -would prove to be
a conservative force rejecting political and religious dissent and accepting Abbasid supremacy as necessary for the unity and stability of the Islamic community.12

The radicalism of the Shia was also softened after the Abbasid revolution. As previous Hashimid revolts had failed and the apparent vindication of the Shia with the success of the Abbasid revolution proved to be disastrous for them, more quietist and accommodative models of leadership became more attractive. The descendents of Husayn, the grandson of the Prophet who was killed by the Umayyads in Karbala in 680, abstained from political actions and remained quietist. The Husaynid branch of the Hashimid clan, led by  Muhammad al-Baqir and Ja far al-Sadiq, and its purely religious and apolit- ical understanding of authority transformed the early Shia from a political to  a sectarian movement. For Ja far al-Sadiq, being Imam did not require the  actual possession of political power but rather signified the access to a reposi- tory of hidden knowledge which the Imam receives via divine inspiration in  order to act as a channel of divine guidance for his followers.13

Although the members of the Husaynid branch, who would provide the line of Imams of the later Twelver Shia, refrained from political activism, the initial hope for the rule of the Mahdi was also expressed around them. When Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya died, some of his followers refused to believe that he had died but assumed that he had gone into occultation (ghayba) and would return in the immediate future as the Mahdi and rule over the Islamic community. Similar speculations arose after the death of Ja far al-Sadiq and of his son Musa al-Kazim.14 Some of their followers likewise upheld the belief that they had merely gone into occultation and would return soon to reverse the existing political order. This notion of occultation would prove useful after the death of the 11th Imam Hasan al- Askari and in the ensuing confusion about his succession. Most Shia believed that his son went into occultation and would return in the future as the Mahdi. The adoption of the notion of occultation by the Twelver Shia had three effects. It ultimately  suppressed the tradition of religio-political dissent of the early Shia by post- poning both the return of the Mahdi and the establishment of a just and  legitimate Islamic government to the distant future. The eschatological con- notations of the Mahdi also became more pronounced as he would appear  shortly before the Day of Judgement. Finally, with the end of the line of the  Imams, the ulama ̄ -assumed religious authority and, as their Sunni counter- parts had done before, formed the Twelver Shia as a religious sect by compil- ing traditions attributed to the Imams and developing Shii jurisprudence and  theology. The dissident nature of the early Shia was finally forsaken, hence allowing the Shia to assimilate into the Muslim mainstream.

# Shii messianic movements and Sufisim

Certain groups within the Shia upheld a dissident stance towards mainstream Islam and offered alternative models of religious authority which challenged
the religious monopoly of the ulama ̄ -and which were more inclined towards  individualised and charismatic forms of leadership as existed with the early Shia. A more radical offshoot of the Shia, who believed in the transfer of the Imamate from Ja far al-Sadiq to his eldest son Ismail, preserved early Shii religio-political dissidence. While initially believing in the occultation and eventual return of Ismail’s son Muhammad as Mahdi, leaders of the Ismailis  later claimed descent from Muhammad ibn Ismail and announced them- selves to be the promised Mahdi. The messianic claims of Sa id ibn Husayn,  who took the name Ubaydullah al-Mahdi in 909, led to the foundation of the Fatimid dynasty which challenged the claims of the Abbasids to the caliphate for almost two centuries. The messianic claims of the leaders of the Nizari branch of the Ismailis with their headquarters in Alamut in northern Iran in the eleventh and twelfth centuries were likewise utilised to oppose the existing political order in a militant struggle led by the Imam-Mahdi. Unlike the mainstream Shia, which considered the line of the Imams to have terminated  with the 12th Imam, the Ismailis believed in the continuation of their charis- matic authority and thereby preserved the tradition of religio-political dis- sent of the early Shia. For the Ismailis, there always has to be a single living  personification of divine guidance, a proof (h  ̇ ujja) of God on earth.15 Ismailism  provided both a political and intellectual alternative for those Muslims dis- content with the Abbasid caliphate and the emerging Sunni traditionalism  and disappointed by the quietism the Twelver Shia had adopted. The Ismaili  Imams offered charismatic and messianic authority that allowed the continu- ation of divine communication with humanity. Furthermore, Ismaili thought  was more open towards rationalism and the Greek philosophical heritage and therefore appealed to Muslim intellectuals who could not identify with the  traditionalist orientations of Sunni and Twelver Shii ulama ̄ -.  16

Although politically less radical, another group also offered an alternative notion of religious authority – a model of religious authority that was also charismatic and akin to the religious authority of the Shii Imams. Mystical  Islam or Sufism challenged the authority of the ulama ̄ -and their rather  literalist and legalist approach to the Qura ̄n offering, similar to the Ismailis,  more esoteric readings of scripture that aimed at revealing its hidden mean- ings. The Sufis invested authority in the friends of God (awliya ̄ alla ̄ h), people  who were considered to be close to God, and put the Perfect Man (al-insa ̄ n al-ka ̄ mil) on top of a hierarchy of saints. The Perfect Man as the Sufi saint closest to God would, in imitation of the Prophet and similar to the Shii Imams, act as a mediator between God and humanity and would provide divine guidance, and hence be rightly-guided in a spiritual and intellectual sense.17 Sufism as a religious movement within Islam transcended sectarian boundaries and introduced charismatic authority as an alternative to the  scholarly authority of the ulama ̄ -to both Shia and Sunnis. Sufi notions of  charismatic authority could be used to express disillusionment with the  religious establishment as embodied by the ulama ̄ -and implicitly contain  ‘the messianic expectation of the human leader, divinely or rationally guided,
who would restore order and justice and establish the ideal rule of the Sage.’ 18

The amalgamation of Sufism, Ismaili political activism and Shii messian- ism led to a proliferation of messianic movements in the fourteenth and  fifteenth centuries during and after the frail rule of the Ilkhanid dynasty in Iran (1256–1353). One of the earliest was initiated by Fazlullah Astarabadi (d. 1394) who claimed to be not only the Mahdi but also an agent of divine  revelation. While he was initially concerned with extracting the hidden spirit- ual message from the Qura ̄n by employing esoteric interpretative techniques  based on the letters of the Qura ̄nic text, the persecution of the members of the heretical Hurufi sect – as they were called – led to their politicisation and militant activism. The messianic claims of Sayyid Muhammad Nurbakhsh (d. 1463) were of a similar nature. Stemming from the environment of Shii  Sufism like Fazlullah, Nurbakhsh’s claims of being the Mahdi were com- bined with his spiritual identification with prophetic figures of the past like  Jesus and Muhammad. Like the Hurufi sect, Nurbakhsh was not primarily interested in seizing political power as part of his messianic mission but devoted much of his time to teaching the mystical path towards God. A consciously political and militant expression of Shii messianism was the  movement initiated by his contemporary Sayyid Muhammad ibn Falah al- Musha sha  (‘the radiant’) (d. 1461 or 1465) who managed to rally the Arab  tribes of Southern Iraq in a revolt against the local rule of the Turcoman Qaraqoyunlu tribe.19

The mystical-cum-messianic movements, which combined claims to cha- rismatic authority with political activism, provided the background out of  which the Safavid Order under the leadership of Ismail managed to conquer Iran and to establish the Safavid dynasty.20 Once the Safavids captured power in Iran, the heretical claims to the charismatic authority of Ismail and the later shahs of the Safavid dynasty had to be de-emphasised. The Safavids’  turn to Twelver Shiism can be understood as a move to routinise their cha- rismatic authority in the transformation of the Safavid Order from a mes- sianic movement to the ruling dynasty. The early Safavid Shahs realised that  the messianic nature of their religio-political authority was useful in initiating a revolution but could not provide a stable ideological foundation for the organisation of a state.21

Despite the suppression of Sufi messianism under the institutionalised  religion of the ulama ̄ -, mystical and esoteric strands of Shii Islam could  survive in Safavid Iran and found exponents in the School of Isfahan. The  yearning for alternative modes of religio-political authority found expres- sion in the representatives of this theosophical school like Mulla Sadra  (1572–1641). Similar to the Sufis, Mulla Sadra upheld the divine guidance of the Perfect Man who had been embodied by the Prophets and Imams in the past and who could be embodied by anyone who reaches the final stages of the mystical journey towards God. Although always placed in the margins of Shii religiosity, the esotericism of the School of Isfahan and its orientation
towards charismatic authority survived in Iran until the nineteenth century. Although theosophists like Mulla Sadra refrained from political activism, their esoteric inclinations kept the Shii tradition of religious dissent alive – a dissent that was articulated only intellectually by Mulla Sadra and his followers but that had the potential to erupt in open political dissidence.22

# Typology of Islamic messianism

Throughout Islamic history, messianic aspirations have challenged the repre- sentatives of the religious mainstream and offered alternative loci of religio- political authority. Messianic hopes might lie dormant in mystical and esoteric  traditions and then suddenly erupt after periods of millenarian anticipation and eschatological speculations. Many messianic movements were militant and launched a jiha ̄ d to overthrow the existing political order as the Abbasids, Fatimids or Safavids did; other claimants to the Mahdiship saw their mission as apolitical and non-militant, and restricted to spiritual guidance. For the Hurufis and the Nurbakhshis, the Mahdi was the supreme mystical guide, devoid of any political pretensions.23

As part of a general typology of Islamic messianism, one can discern not only different attitudes towards militant struggle but also different objectives and mandates, in particular between the Sunni and Shii understanding of the role of the Mahdi. Generally, the Mahdi has always been a rather marginal figure in Sunni Islam. Despite the traditions of his eschatological role that found their way into the canonical h  ̇ adı ̄th collections of Sunni Islam, the belief in the Mahdi has never played a central role in Sunni creed.24

Central to the messianic mandate of the Sunni Mahdi is his call to a return to pristine Islam as it existed at the time of the Prophet and his followers. The Sunni Mahdi accepts the finality of Islam and the completeness of the religious law (sharı ̄ a) and advocates a stricter adherence to Islam in times of a perceived demise of Islamic religiosity and of an assumed rise in moral laxity. While the Sunni Mahdi agrees with the definition of the religious mainstream  as pronounced by the ulama ̄ -in theory, he disagrees with the performance of  the religious establishment which has failed to protect the Islamic tradition.25 His messianic mission is very often connected with the notion of the renewal or the restoration (tajdı ̄d) of Islam and the figure of the centennial ‘renewer’ (mujaddid) whom, following a prophetic tradition, God sends to the Muslim community at the beginning of each century. As a consequence, the Sunni Mahdi demands from his followers a stricter observance of Islamic law so that they may distinguish themselves from the religious mainstream which has failed to live up to religious standards.26

Shii messianism entails a different dynamic. For the Shii Mahdi, as for his Sunni counterpart, the role model of the early community is still valid and the messianic age he inaugurates re-creates the time of the Prophet. But the return to the prophetic age has different implications. Following the Shii understanding of continuous divine guidance under the Imams and the
cumulative nature of this guidance which increases religious knowledge over time, according to esoteric strands of Shiism in particular, the mandate of the Shii Mahdi is less restricted:

> His return to the prophetic age of Islam is a return to the age of religious creativity, a return to the prophetic paradigm and the model of the Imams with the aim of constructing a new religious dispensation.27

The understanding of the mission of the Mahdi as being similar to that of the Prophet Muhammad is very often taken to the radical conclusion that, like the Prophet, the Mahdi initiates a new religious dispensation. Whereas Twelver Shiism follows the Sunni conception of the Mahdi as the enforcer of the sharı ̄ a, Ismailis have taken traditions attributed to the Imams stating that the Mahdi will come with a new cause to mean that he will abrogate Islam and the sharı ̄ a and bring a new religion in its stead. Ismaili claimants to the Mahdihood gained notoriety for their abrogation of the sharı ̄ a like Hasan ala ̄ dhikrihı ̄ al-sala ̄ m, leader of the Nizari-Ismailis in Alamut, who in 1164 announced the advent of the Day of Judgement and declared Islamic law in consequence as no longer binding.28 But also outside Ismailism, the potential claim to a new religious dispensation was very often realised by leaders of Shii messianic movements, as the examples of the Hurufi and Nurbakhshi sects show.

# Messianism and religious revival in the nineteenth century

The different types of Islamic messianism reoccurred in the nineteenth cen- tury. The political, economic, social and cultural dislocation the Muslim  world experienced, the occupation by foreign powers and the general feeling  that something had gone wrong in Islamic history created a variety of mes- sianic movements in the Middle East and the wider Muslim world. Many of  these messianic movements shared a Sufi background in the sense that the  claimant to messianic authority had been affiliated with a Sufi order or ven- erated as a Sufi saint prior to their assertion of being the Mahdi. This obser- vation serves as further evidence of the dormant millenarian potential within  Sufism that can erupt under certain circumstances and transform an ordinary Sufi saint into the Islamic saviour.29

The Mahdi uprisings of 1881–5 in Sudan are an example of a militant messianic movement in a Sunni context. At the time when Egyptian control over Sudan was weakened, Muhammad Ahmad ibn Abdullah claimed to be the promised Mahdi in 1881. Both in the person of Muhammad Ahmad and in the movement which he began several of the Sunni features of Islamic messianism became manifest. The dormant messianism of Sufism can be well exemplified by him, as Muhammad Ahmad was a Sufi saint who enjoyed the veneration of the local tribal population and then turned into the Mahdi. Following the Sunni mandate of the Mahdi, he saw himself as the restorer or

renewer (mujaddid) of authentic Islam which had been perverted in his time. His identification with the mujaddid was also facilitated, as he began to raise his spiritual claims shortly before the beginning of the fourteenth century of the Islamic era (which started 12 November 1882). As the mission of the Mahdi entails a militant uprising against any illegitimate government,  Muhammad Ahmad instigated a jiha ̄ d against the Egyptians as the embodi- ment of illegitimate and unjust rule in Sudan at that time. The troops of  the Mahdi managed to conquer Sudan and even resisted the combined efforts of Egyptian and British armies to suppress them. Shortly before his death in 1885, the Mahdi managed to establish an independent state in Sudan.30

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908) is an example of a messianic figure stemming from the environment of South Asian Sufi Islam with an explicitly non-militant and apolitical understanding of his mission. Born in the village of Qadiyan in the province of Punjab, he first established himself locally as a well-respected religious scholar before making claims to being the mujaddid or renewer of Islam on the eve of the fourteenth century of the Islamic era. Ghulam Ahmad felt that he was the one to assume this role in his time when  the ulama ̄ -had failed to preserve the integrity and authenticity of Islam,  when the Islamic community had reached an unprecedented level of corrup- tion, and Muslim lands were occupied by Christians whose missionaries  threatened the very survival of the Islamic community. For Ghulam Ahmad, being the centennial renewer of Islam implied holding a special spiritual status as well. Not only was he the promised Mahdi but also a new prophet who received divine revelations to purify Islam and return to the model of the early community.31 The notion of a return to pristine Islam as part of its centennial renewal and the perception of the Mahdi re-enacting the mission of the Prophet were radicalised by Ghulam Ahmad in his claims to be a minor prophet after Muhammad. The controversial nature of such a claim is obvious, given the fundamental Muslim belief in the finality of Muhammad’s prophethood. Ghulam Ahmad’s claims show that messianic authority can arise out of opposition to the perceived failure of the traditional holders of religious authority and can implicitly if not explicitly challenge fundamental Muslim doctrines.

The Babi and Baha i movements are examples of two historically linked messianic movements with a Shii background. Their origins and evolutions will be described in greater detail later. Muhammad Ahmad in Sudan, Ghulam  Ahmad in India, the Bab and Baha ullah in Iran are each nineteenth cen- tury manifestations of the different types of Islamic messianism. While  Muhammad Ahmad and the Bab conceived their mission as being of a mili- tant nature, Ghulam Ahmad and Baha ullah considered themselves to be  merely spiritual Mahdis providing religious guidance for their followers. More importantly, they all also give evidence of the different dynamics of messianism in Shii and Sunni Islam. While the Sudanese Mahdi and Ghulam Ahmad intended to restore pristine Islam, for the Bab and Baha ullah their
messianic mission meant the abrogation of Islam and the beginning of a new religious dispensation.

Hence, traditions of religio-political dissent in esoteric, mystical and mil- lenarian strands of Islam also re-emerged in the nineteenth century. The Babi  and Baha i movements in Iran and the Ottoman Empire, the Mahdi uprisings in Sudan and the Ahmadiyya in South Asia are just some examples of how dissident traditions preserved in Sufism and Shiism can suddenly lead to messianic eruptions. But how and why are these modern expressions  of religious dissidence in Islam relevant for those government officials, bur- eaucrats, intellectuals and modernist religious scholars who laboured for  the reform of Islam and the modernisation of Middle Eastern societies? Bureaucrats and intellectuals on the one side, Mahdis and prophets on the  other side responded in their own ways to the emergence of Western modern- ity in the nineteenth-century Middle East. What they all shared is a dissident  stance towards the religious and political establishment and a yearning for an alternative vision of Islam created by new forms of religious authority.  Muslim reformers like Muhammad Abduh shared with contemporary mes- sianic movements like the Baha i movement their origins in the mystical and  esoteric traditions of Islam which provided them with the intellectual means to position themselves, like the Mahdis and their followers, in opposition to political regimes in the Middle East and the upholders of the Islamic  tradition, the ulama ̄ -. It has been shown that many of the most promi- nent reformers in the nineteenth-century Middle East were associated with  movements of a mystical or millenarian nature.32

# Charisma and its routinisation

This study is an exercise in the analysis of religious change focusing particu- larly on transformations of religious authority in the context of nineteenth- century Middle Eastern reform movements. In their opposition to the religious  establishment, Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh embodied or attached themselves to alternative loci of religious authority which were endowed with charismata as represented by mystical and millenarian strands of Muslim  thought. However, later they had to reconcile their origins in religious dissi- dence in order to perpetuate their legacies for posterity.

Max Weber’s studies on the nature of charismatic authority and its routin- isation are used to describe the evolution of Abdul-Baha and Abduh as  Islamicate religious reformers who shared common origins in mystical and millenarian traditions of Islam and who, at later stages of their careers as religious leaders, offered contradictory responses to the perceived decline of traditional Islam. One starting point in Weber’s sociology of religion is the  ideal-typical contrast between priest and prophet. Weber assumes the inher- ent ritualism and traditionalism of religion: ‘das Heilige ist das spezifisch  Unveränderliche’  33 (the sacred is the specifically unchangeable). The pastness of the sacred is illustrated by the scrupulous repetition of rituals and the
canonisation and dogmatisation of religious beliefs that occur during the establishment of religious institutions. For Weber, clearly defined rituals, a canonical set of sacred scriptures, and a hierarchy of institutions overseeing the adherence to both are part of the stereotyping tendencies of religions which act to prevent change and to preserve the tradition. The church is the  institutional embodiment of this attitude and the priest the holder of author- ity within the church due to his association with a sacred tradition. As a  religious functionary of the church, the priest officiates at its rituals and ensures that their proper performance is effective in connecting lay followers  with the sacred. The priest is socialised within an educational tradition ensur- ing his proper instruction into the canonical beliefs of the church and enabling  him to preserve their authenticity.34 The church thereby offers its lay followers ‘permanence’  35 as an institution that has become ‘daily routine’ 36.

Weber positions the ideal type of the prophet as opposite to the priest. The prophet is understood as ‘a purely individual bearer of charisma, who by virtue of his mission proclaims a religious doctrine or divine commandment’ 37:

> The personal call is the decisive element distinguishing the prophet from the priest. The latter lays claim to authority by virtue of his service in a sacred tradition, while the prophet’s claim is based on personal revelation and charisma.38

Charismatic authority stands outside daily routine, is of an extraordinary nature and is strongly personalised. The person endowed with charismatic  authority displays qualities which deviate from ordinary behaviour and pro- vide him with a special status distinguishing him from ordinary people. In the  case of the prophet, his proximity to God and his election as transmitter of divine revelations constitute his supra-natural, not commonly accessible authority. Weber realises not only the predominance of charismatic authority  in times of social, economic, political or religious crisis39 but also its revo- lutionary character. The legalistic order of the church personified by the  priest establishes rules and norms to preserve tradition and the sacredness of the past. It is inclined towards permanence and routine. Charisma disrupts the rules and norms of tradition, turns everything that is held sacred upside down, and demands the submission to the absolute novel and innovative. For Weber, charismatic authority is ‘die spezifisch “schöpferische” revolutionäre Macht der Geschichte’  40 (the specifically ‘creative’ revolutionary force of his- tory). The prophet exhibits religious charisma and stands outside the church  tradition. For Weber, charisma religiously speaking is heretical: ‘it makes a sovereign break with all traditional or rational norms: “It is written, but I say unto you.” ’41

Weber acknowledges not only the revolutionary character of charismatic authority but also its inherent instability. The holder of charismatic authority constantly needs to prove his legitimacy by revealing proofs of his charismatic election. A prophet needs to provide a constant stream of revelations so as to
manifest his special relationship with God.42 The instability of charismatic authority becomes particularly manifest when its holder dies. If the sectarian community which has emerged as the result of the charisma of its founder wishes to continue its communal bond, it needs to enter a process that Weber calls the routinisation of charisma. The charismatic authority of the founder needs to be traditionalised and rationalised in the formation of a religious organisation like a church. While initially the religious movement was sectarian in character, as it seceded from the church, it, now, turns itself into a new church organisation. In the new church the exceptional charismatic authority of its founding figure becomes routinised with the establishment of an organisational hierarchy, the rules and norms of a religious tradition and a conceptualisation of authority based on membership in the hierarchy  and adherence to the rules and norms of the tradition.43 The originally revo- lutionary and innovative and, for Weber, heretical nature of charismatic auth- ority and of the sectarian movement it initiated thereby becomes orthodox.

One of the problems of Weber’s typology is its obvious ideal-typical character based on dichotomies like priest and prophet, church and sect, orthodox and heterodox, tradition and charisma. Weber’s distinction between charisma and its routinisation assumes a dichotomy between church and sect but also links them to each other in an organic development, according to Peter L. Berger. Whereas a sect stresses charismatic leadership and the immediacy of the spirit, this charisma is secularised in the process of its routinisation when the sect assumes a systematic structure and becomes a church. Then, the spirit becomes profane and the sacred is encapsulated in a  secular organisation.44 As the transformation of a sect into a church illus- trates, the assumed dichotomy between orthodoxy and heterodoxy is rather  artificial and, as this study will illustrate, ultimately not very useful in explain- ing how a dissident movement positions itself towards the religious tradition  out of which it has emerged. The relationship between the religious main- stream and a charismatic eruption within it can oscillate between being con- frontational and symbiotic. Dissident movements have been embraced with  variable success in order to alleviate their opposition to the religious estab- lishment. The Christian concept of ecclesiola in ecclesia and the Islamic  notion of ikhtila ̄ f al-madha ̄ hib intend to define the religious mainstream in the broadest possible sense in order to appease and to embrace possible dissidents.45

The need of a religious tradition to redefine itself particularly arises when its established institutions become vulnerable and fail to provide identity and security for the members of its community. In such a crisis milieu – although not only then – charismatic movements challenge the authority of the religious mainstream. However, such dissident movements, which secede from the religious establishment by addressing its failure to provide identity and security, do not necessarily constitute a counter-model of the religious mainstream but rather cherish the very values which the tradition is supposed to uphold. Charismatic movements attempt to realise values which
The need of a religious tradition to redefine itself particularly arises when its established institutions become vulnerable and fail to provide identity and security for the members of its community. In such a crisis milieu – although not only then – charismatic movements challenge the authority of the religious mainstream. However, such dissident movements, which secede from the religious establishment by addressing its failure to provide identity and security, do not necessarily constitute a counter-model of the religious mainstream but rather cherish the very values which the tradition is supposed to uphold. Charismatic movements attempt to realise values which

> The prophet, who was for Weber the epitome of charismatic leadership, based his message on an appeal to an idealised past in order to break with a corrupt present. Charisma may, therefore, be based on traditional norms rather than representing a distinct break with them.47

Charismatic authority is based on divine authority of some sort, but the message its owner proclaims needs to be communicated in the language known to its addressees. Hence, charisma does not really establish a break with the tradition but rather a ‘re-interpretation of known facts and Weltanschauung’, 48 a reinterpretation that can be quite radical. Despite the origin of charismatic  movements in the concealed and obvious aspirations of the religious main- stream, its further development triggered by internal and external factors  might lead to a complete separation, particularly when the charismatic movement undergoes its own process of routinisation. If the mainstream is  not able to accommodate charismatic movements within its own ranks, dissi- dence then leads to a parting of the ways, a religious schism or the creation of  a new religious movement.49

Another problem with Weber’s approach lies in his Christiano-centric per- spective. His dichotomies between church and sect, priesthood and prophecy,  tradition and charisma are not only ideal-typical but also result from his studies of Christian Protestantism. How can Weber’s concepts moulded by Protestant theology be applied to the study of Islam? In Islam, a church organisation and a sacerdotal priesthood do not exist. The authority of the  ulama ̄ -, the closest group in Islam to a genuine clergy, is not derived from  membership in a church organisation but from being in a social group whose religious authority is based on knowledge – knowledge of the Qura ̄n and the sunna of the Prophet, of the sources and methods of jurisprudence and of the  scholarly tradition which has emerged over the centuries.50 This shared edu- cational ethos and experienced socialisation made the ulama ̄ -into a class  with a class consciousness, as Mark Sedgwick suggests, in order to propose ‘the possible identification of the ulama as the Church of Islam.’  51 In contrast  to the ulama ̄ -, other groups favoured charismatic models of religious author- ity, most notably Shii Islam with its line of Imams from among the descendents  of the Prophet, and Sufism with its notion that certain individuals entertain a closer relationship with God. In contrast to the acquired knowledge ( ilm) of  the ulama ̄ -, these individuals possess intuitive knowledge (ma rifa) received  from God by illumination (ishra ̄ q), disclosure (kashf), inspiration (ilha ̄ m) if not revelation (tajallı ̄/wah ̇  ı ̄) itself. Very often one can find the two modes of
knowledge – traditional and charismatic – conflated in ulama ̄ -who are Sufis  at the same time.52

Despite the problems of translating Weber’s concepts into other cultures and religions, the tension between some form of institutionalised tradition  as embodied and preserved by the ulama ̄ -on the one side and the holders  of charismatic authority on the other also exists in Islam. Weber’s insight  into the creativity and instability of charismatic authority and the subse- quent need to routinise it for its preservation will be used to explain how  Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh moved in opposite directions of religi- ous reform despite their sharing of common origins in Islamic mysticism and  millenarianism.

Routinisation of charisma is understood in a broad sense. This study does not conceive itself as a sociological survey on the institutionalisation of two different religious movements in the nineteenth century. Although the Baha i Faith would offer a textbook example of the Weberian transition from sect to church in the process of the routinisation of charisma, this study is not  primarily interested in the transformation of social and organisational struc- tures.53 The study rather follows one of Weber’s major concerns, as Shmuel  Noah Eisenstadt puts it, the nature of ‘cultural creativity’.  54 It explores the religious and intellectual environment out of which religious and political dissent was articulated in the nineteenth-century Middle East and the role of charismatic authority therein. By attaching themselves to charismatic leaders like Baha ullah and Afghani and traditions of religious dissidence,  Abdul-Baha and Abduh were able to oppose creatively religious traditional- ism. At the same time, they had to experience the instability of charismatic  authority and realised the need to routinise it. In the case of Abduh, it was his alienation from Afghani’s quasi-messianic ideas and his fruitless political activism that made him revert to mainstream Sunnism, albeit in a new guise. Abdul-Baha radicalised the millenarianism of his father’s movement and initiated the formation of the Baha i community as a distinct and new religious  movement. They used very different strategies of routinisation, sharing how- ever an awareness that charismatic authority needs to be disciplined and  ordered in order to ensure that the creative output it has produced can survive in a new stable framework.

# General remark on the nature of Muslim biographical writing

This study uses a variety of original sources on the lives, activities and teach- ings of Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh. Some remarks on the nature  of these sources need to be provided. The discussion will start with some general comments on the nature of biographical writing in the Muslim context – a discussion which will leave aside the general debate on whether there is a  tradition of Muslim (auto)biographical writing or not.55 Discussing the rep- resentation of religious scholars in biographical works, Dale F. Eickelmann  makes a useful distinction between ‘individual’ and ‘person’. The ‘individual’
denotes the self-reflective human being with his desires, inner thoughts, hopes  and beliefs, while ‘person’ describes the social status attributed to the indi- vidual comprising the expectations, roles and the overall significance that  society credits to the individual. Following these social expectations, a trad- itional biographical account of a Muslim scholar would contain information  on his formal education, the age when he memorised the entire Qura ̄n, the names of his teachers and the books he studied as well his own contributions in the field of religious scholarship. Everything outside the scope of what would define a religious scholar, like other political or commercial activities, would usually be ignored.56

More importantly, biographies lack speculations on the inner thoughts and motives of the individual described. An esoteric tendency within traditional biographies has been noted. Very often, biographers practise taqiyya, the deliberate dissimulation and concealment of the true feelings and beliefs of the portrayed figure. When the religious and political context in which the author is writing might prove unfavourable for such feelings and beliefs and their revelation might harm the reputation of a person, they remain undisclosed.57 Modern biographies in contrast are interested not only in revealing and investigating such hidden intentions of the individual but also  in tracing developments and evolutions within his or her lifespan. The indi- vidual is seen as evolving over time and changing his identity in response  to events in his life. Traditional biographies, however, often attribute ‘fixed qualities’ 58 to the individual without any interest or awareness of possible developments in his personality. The individual is presented as having had for his entire life all the qualities that conform to the social expectations regarding the role he fulfilled in society. Stressing the social person and his conformity with his role in society provides one of the main motivations for writing a biography. There is a certain apologetic drive behind biographical  writing. Biographies serve the purpose of showing the merits and achieve- ments of the portrayed figure, be he a scholar, saint or political leader, and to  create an inspirational image of him for the targeted audience, a source of guidance and emulation for those wishing to follow in his footsteps.59 Hence,  biographies of eminent religious figures are not dispassionate sources of his- torical data but rather hagiographical depictions. Their interest is not in ‘what  actually happened?’ but ‘what must have happened?’ in the life of a scholar or saint so that it corresponds to the social and religious expectations of the audience.

Another important feature to bear in mind in dealing with Muslim bio- graphical works is what has been called the tradition of imitative writing in  Middle Eastern historiographies. Studies of medieval Persian chronicles have shown how later authors reproduced an earlier model text and used it as a standard narrative for their own rendering of the chronicle. From a modern historiographical perspective, such incidents would be classified as cases of plagiarism. However, such a judgement misperceives the actual nature of Middle Eastern historiographical writing. Imitating the works of precursor
chroniclers acknowledges and preserves their works and also expresses the commitment of later authors to conventions of historical and biographical  writings which had been established earlier.60 However, the imitation of earl- ier works does not merely imply their complete verbatim reproduction. While  earlier narratives are accepted as a template, very often changes to the ori- ginal text are added and certain information is omitted. The alteration of the  model text is often motivated by the concerns and agendas of the later author and his target audience.61 For example, changes in early Safavid chronicles were an important instrument to provide legitimacy for the dynasty. The Sunni origin of the Safavid Sufi order had to be reinterpreted and its founders had to be presented as Twelver Shia, because the Sunni origin of the order and the later Shii commitment of the dynasty contradicted each other.62

The biographical sources used for the reconstruction of the lives of Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh – although all written in the twentieth  century – include the aforementioned characteristics of Middle Eastern his- toriographical and biographical writing. Rather than being interested in  Abdul-Baha and Abduh as individuals with their undisclosed desires and hidden intentions, their biographies provide depictions which conform to the expectations one would have of a saintly leader of a religious community like  Abdul-Baha or a religious scholar like Abduh. Disinterested in develop- ments and changes in their careers and possible tensions in their ideas, the  biographies present Abdul-Baha and Abduh as personalities with fixed qual- ities who throughout their lives laboured for the same objectives and held  the same ideas. Moreover, the biographies serve apologetic and didactic pur- poses. They underline their respective credentials as a charismatic leader of a  religious community and as a religious scholar and also present them as sources of inspiration and emulation. The biographies have to be seen within  the tradition of imitative writing as well, as they repeat conventions of trad- itional Middle Eastern biographies. Several biographies of Abdul-Baha and  Abduh use earlier narratives as templates, imitating and altering them at the same time.

The nature of the sources creates methodological problems. While this study is very much interested in disclosing contradictions, developments and  tensions in the lives of Abdul-Baha and Abduh, the biographical data avail- able does not share this interest. The study intends to place both figures in  unfamiliar territories. Abdul-Baha is positioned within the context of other Middle Eastern reform movements while Abduh is brought into connection with Islamic mysticism and millenarianism. Their biographers were either not interested in these connections or wrote their biographies with the intention of denying them. If one is fortunate, one can find statements from their own hands contained in written correspondence, for example, which counter the narratives of their official biographers. Very often one has to resort to other sources like memoirs or observations of their contemporaries which put the official accounts into a new light. This study will apply a critical reading and analysis of the source material in order to counter the fixed representations
of Abdul-Baha and Abduh in the quasi-official biographies and to highlight their gradual evolution as religious reformers.

# Sources on 'Abdul-Baha

. . . goes to page 23 

# Sources on Muhammad 'Abduh

. . . goes to page 28
