towards charismatic authority survived in Iran until the nineteenth century. Although theosophists like Mulla Sadra refrained from political activism, their esoteric inclinations kept the Shii tradition of religious dissent alive – a dissent that was articulated only intellectually by Mulla Sadra and his followers but that had the potential to erupt in open political dissidence.22

# Typology of Islamic messianism

Throughout Islamic history, messianic aspirations have challenged the repre- sentatives of the religious mainstream and offered alternative loci of religio- political authority. Messianic hopes might lie dormant in mystical and esoteric  traditions and then suddenly erupt after periods of millenarian anticipation and eschatological speculations. Many messianic movements were militant and launched a jiha ̄ d to overthrow the existing political order as the Abbasids, Fatimids or Safavids did; other claimants to the Mahdiship saw their mission as apolitical and non-militant, and restricted to spiritual guidance. For the Hurufis and the Nurbakhshis, the Mahdi was the supreme mystical guide, devoid of any political pretensions.23

As part of a general typology of Islamic messianism, one can discern not only different attitudes towards militant struggle but also different objectives and mandates, in particular between the Sunni and Shii understanding of the role of the Mahdi. Generally, the Mahdi has always been a rather marginal figure in Sunni Islam. Despite the traditions of his eschatological role that found their way into the canonical h  ̇ adı ̄th collections of Sunni Islam, the belief in the Mahdi has never played a central role in Sunni creed.24

Central to the messianic mandate of the Sunni Mahdi is his call to a return to pristine Islam as it existed at the time of the Prophet and his followers. The Sunni Mahdi accepts the finality of Islam and the completeness of the religious law (sharı ̄ a) and advocates a stricter adherence to Islam in times of a perceived demise of Islamic religiosity and of an assumed rise in moral laxity. While the Sunni Mahdi agrees with the definition of the religious mainstream  as pronounced by the ulama ̄ -in theory, he disagrees with the performance of  the religious establishment which has failed to protect the Islamic tradition.25 His messianic mission is very often connected with the notion of the renewal or the restoration (tajdı ̄d) of Islam and the figure of the centennial ‘renewer’ (mujaddid) whom, following a prophetic tradition, God sends to the Muslim community at the beginning of each century. As a consequence, the Sunni Mahdi demands from his followers a stricter observance of Islamic law so that they may distinguish themselves from the religious mainstream which has failed to live up to religious standards.26

Shii messianism entails a different dynamic. For the Shii Mahdi, as for his Sunni counterpart, the role model of the early community is still valid and the messianic age he inaugurates re-creates the time of the Prophet. But the return to the prophetic age has different implications. Following the Shii understanding of continuous divine guidance under the Imams and the
