cumulative nature of this guidance which increases religious knowledge over time, according to esoteric strands of Shiism in particular, the mandate of the Shii Mahdi is less restricted:

> His return to the prophetic age of Islam is a return to the age of religious creativity, a return to the prophetic paradigm and the model of the Imams with the aim of constructing a new religious dispensation.27

The understanding of the mission of the Mahdi as being similar to that of the Prophet Muhammad is very often taken to the radical conclusion that, like the Prophet, the Mahdi initiates a new religious dispensation. Whereas Twelver Shiism follows the Sunni conception of the Mahdi as the enforcer of the sharı ̄ a, Ismailis have taken traditions attributed to the Imams stating that the Mahdi will come with a new cause to mean that he will abrogate Islam and the sharı ̄ a and bring a new religion in its stead. Ismaili claimants to the Mahdihood gained notoriety for their abrogation of the sharı ̄ a like Hasan ala ̄ dhikrihı ̄ al-sala ̄ m, leader of the Nizari-Ismailis in Alamut, who in 1164 announced the advent of the Day of Judgement and declared Islamic law in consequence as no longer binding.28 But also outside Ismailism, the potential claim to a new religious dispensation was very often realised by leaders of Shii messianic movements, as the examples of the Hurufi and Nurbakhshi sects show.

# Messianism and religious revival in the nineteenth century

The different types of Islamic messianism reoccurred in the nineteenth cen- tury. The political, economic, social and cultural dislocation the Muslim  world experienced, the occupation by foreign powers and the general feeling  that something had gone wrong in Islamic history created a variety of mes- sianic movements in the Middle East and the wider Muslim world. Many of  these messianic movements shared a Sufi background in the sense that the  claimant to messianic authority had been affiliated with a Sufi order or ven- erated as a Sufi saint prior to their assertion of being the Mahdi. This obser- vation serves as further evidence of the dormant millenarian potential within  Sufism that can erupt under certain circumstances and transform an ordinary Sufi saint into the Islamic saviour.29

The Mahdi uprisings of 1881–5 in Sudan are an example of a militant messianic movement in a Sunni context. At the time when Egyptian control over Sudan was weakened, Muhammad Ahmad ibn Abdullah claimed to be the promised Mahdi in 1881. Both in the person of Muhammad Ahmad and in the movement which he began several of the Sunni features of Islamic messianism became manifest. The dormant messianism of Sufism can be well exemplified by him, as Muhammad Ahmad was a Sufi saint who enjoyed the veneration of the local tribal population and then turned into the Mahdi. Following the Sunni mandate of the Mahdi, he saw himself as the restorer or

