renewer (mujaddid) of authentic Islam which had been perverted in his time. His identification with the mujaddid was also facilitated, as he began to raise his spiritual claims shortly before the beginning of the fourteenth century of the Islamic era (which started 12 November 1882). As the mission of the Mahdi entails a militant uprising against any illegitimate government,  Muhammad Ahmad instigated a jiha ̄ d against the Egyptians as the embodi- ment of illegitimate and unjust rule in Sudan at that time. The troops of  the Mahdi managed to conquer Sudan and even resisted the combined efforts of Egyptian and British armies to suppress them. Shortly before his death in 1885, the Mahdi managed to establish an independent state in Sudan.30

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad (1835–1908) is an example of a messianic figure stemming from the environment of South Asian Sufi Islam with an explicitly non-militant and apolitical understanding of his mission. Born in the village of Qadiyan in the province of Punjab, he first established himself locally as a well-respected religious scholar before making claims to being the mujaddid or renewer of Islam on the eve of the fourteenth century of the Islamic era. Ghulam Ahmad felt that he was the one to assume this role in his time when  the ulama ̄ -had failed to preserve the integrity and authenticity of Islam,  when the Islamic community had reached an unprecedented level of corrup- tion, and Muslim lands were occupied by Christians whose missionaries  threatened the very survival of the Islamic community. For Ghulam Ahmad, being the centennial renewer of Islam implied holding a special spiritual status as well. Not only was he the promised Mahdi but also a new prophet who received divine revelations to purify Islam and return to the model of the early community.31 The notion of a return to pristine Islam as part of its centennial renewal and the perception of the Mahdi re-enacting the mission of the Prophet were radicalised by Ghulam Ahmad in his claims to be a minor prophet after Muhammad. The controversial nature of such a claim is obvious, given the fundamental Muslim belief in the finality of Muhammad’s prophethood. Ghulam Ahmad’s claims show that messianic authority can arise out of opposition to the perceived failure of the traditional holders of religious authority and can implicitly if not explicitly challenge fundamental Muslim doctrines.

The Babi and Baha i movements are examples of two historically linked messianic movements with a Shii background. Their origins and evolutions will be described in greater detail later. Muhammad Ahmad in Sudan, Ghulam  Ahmad in India, the Bab and Baha ullah in Iran are each nineteenth cen- tury manifestations of the different types of Islamic messianism. While  Muhammad Ahmad and the Bab conceived their mission as being of a mili- tant nature, Ghulam Ahmad and Baha ullah considered themselves to be  merely spiritual Mahdis providing religious guidance for their followers. More importantly, they all also give evidence of the different dynamics of messianism in Shii and Sunni Islam. While the Sudanese Mahdi and Ghulam Ahmad intended to restore pristine Islam, for the Bab and Baha ullah their
