messianic mission meant the abrogation of Islam and the beginning of a new religious dispensation.

Hence, traditions of religio-political dissent in esoteric, mystical and mil- lenarian strands of Islam also re-emerged in the nineteenth century. The Babi  and Baha i movements in Iran and the Ottoman Empire, the Mahdi uprisings in Sudan and the Ahmadiyya in South Asia are just some examples of how dissident traditions preserved in Sufism and Shiism can suddenly lead to messianic eruptions. But how and why are these modern expressions  of religious dissidence in Islam relevant for those government officials, bur- eaucrats, intellectuals and modernist religious scholars who laboured for  the reform of Islam and the modernisation of Middle Eastern societies? Bureaucrats and intellectuals on the one side, Mahdis and prophets on the  other side responded in their own ways to the emergence of Western modern- ity in the nineteenth-century Middle East. What they all shared is a dissident  stance towards the religious and political establishment and a yearning for an alternative vision of Islam created by new forms of religious authority.  Muslim reformers like Muhammad Abduh shared with contemporary mes- sianic movements like the Baha i movement their origins in the mystical and  esoteric traditions of Islam which provided them with the intellectual means to position themselves, like the Mahdis and their followers, in opposition to political regimes in the Middle East and the upholders of the Islamic  tradition, the ulama ̄ -. It has been shown that many of the most promi- nent reformers in the nineteenth-century Middle East were associated with  movements of a mystical or millenarian nature.32

# Charisma and its routinisation

This study is an exercise in the analysis of religious change focusing particu- larly on transformations of religious authority in the context of nineteenth- century Middle Eastern reform movements. In their opposition to the religious  establishment, Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh embodied or attached themselves to alternative loci of religious authority which were endowed with charismata as represented by mystical and millenarian strands of Muslim  thought. However, later they had to reconcile their origins in religious dissi- dence in order to perpetuate their legacies for posterity.

Max Weber’s studies on the nature of charismatic authority and its routin- isation are used to describe the evolution of Abdul-Baha and Abduh as  Islamicate religious reformers who shared common origins in mystical and millenarian traditions of Islam and who, at later stages of their careers as religious leaders, offered contradictory responses to the perceived decline of traditional Islam. One starting point in Weber’s sociology of religion is the  ideal-typical contrast between priest and prophet. Weber assumes the inher- ent ritualism and traditionalism of religion: ‘das Heilige ist das spezifisch  Unveränderliche’  33 (the sacred is the specifically unchangeable). The pastness of the sacred is illustrated by the scrupulous repetition of rituals and the
