canonisation and dogmatisation of religious beliefs that occur during the establishment of religious institutions. For Weber, clearly defined rituals, a canonical set of sacred scriptures, and a hierarchy of institutions overseeing the adherence to both are part of the stereotyping tendencies of religions which act to prevent change and to preserve the tradition. The church is the  institutional embodiment of this attitude and the priest the holder of author- ity within the church due to his association with a sacred tradition. As a  religious functionary of the church, the priest officiates at its rituals and ensures that their proper performance is effective in connecting lay followers  with the sacred. The priest is socialised within an educational tradition ensur- ing his proper instruction into the canonical beliefs of the church and enabling  him to preserve their authenticity.34 The church thereby offers its lay followers ‘permanence’  35 as an institution that has become ‘daily routine’ 36.

Weber positions the ideal type of the prophet as opposite to the priest. The prophet is understood as ‘a purely individual bearer of charisma, who by virtue of his mission proclaims a religious doctrine or divine commandment’ 37:

> The personal call is the decisive element distinguishing the prophet from the priest. The latter lays claim to authority by virtue of his service in a sacred tradition, while the prophet’s claim is based on personal revelation and charisma.38

Charismatic authority stands outside daily routine, is of an extraordinary nature and is strongly personalised. The person endowed with charismatic  authority displays qualities which deviate from ordinary behaviour and pro- vide him with a special status distinguishing him from ordinary people. In the  case of the prophet, his proximity to God and his election as transmitter of divine revelations constitute his supra-natural, not commonly accessible authority. Weber realises not only the predominance of charismatic authority  in times of social, economic, political or religious crisis39 but also its revo- lutionary character. The legalistic order of the church personified by the  priest establishes rules and norms to preserve tradition and the sacredness of the past. It is inclined towards permanence and routine. Charisma disrupts the rules and norms of tradition, turns everything that is held sacred upside down, and demands the submission to the absolute novel and innovative. For Weber, charismatic authority is ‘die spezifisch “schöpferische” revolutionäre Macht der Geschichte’  40 (the specifically ‘creative’ revolutionary force of his- tory). The prophet exhibits religious charisma and stands outside the church  tradition. For Weber, charisma religiously speaking is heretical: ‘it makes a sovereign break with all traditional or rational norms: “It is written, but I say unto you.” ’41

Weber acknowledges not only the revolutionary character of charismatic authority but also its inherent instability. The holder of charismatic authority constantly needs to prove his legitimacy by revealing proofs of his charismatic election. A prophet needs to provide a constant stream of revelations so as to
