manifest his special relationship with God.42 The instability of charismatic authority becomes particularly manifest when its holder dies. If the sectarian community which has emerged as the result of the charisma of its founder wishes to continue its communal bond, it needs to enter a process that Weber calls the routinisation of charisma. The charismatic authority of the founder needs to be traditionalised and rationalised in the formation of a religious organisation like a church. While initially the religious movement was sectarian in character, as it seceded from the church, it, now, turns itself into a new church organisation. In the new church the exceptional charismatic authority of its founding figure becomes routinised with the establishment of an organisational hierarchy, the rules and norms of a religious tradition and a conceptualisation of authority based on membership in the hierarchy  and adherence to the rules and norms of the tradition.43 The originally revo- lutionary and innovative and, for Weber, heretical nature of charismatic auth- ority and of the sectarian movement it initiated thereby becomes orthodox.

One of the problems of Weber’s typology is its obvious ideal-typical character based on dichotomies like priest and prophet, church and sect, orthodox and heterodox, tradition and charisma. Weber’s distinction between charisma and its routinisation assumes a dichotomy between church and sect but also links them to each other in an organic development, according to Peter L. Berger. Whereas a sect stresses charismatic leadership and the immediacy of the spirit, this charisma is secularised in the process of its routinisation when the sect assumes a systematic structure and becomes a church. Then, the spirit becomes profane and the sacred is encapsulated in a  secular organisation.44 As the transformation of a sect into a church illus- trates, the assumed dichotomy between orthodoxy and heterodoxy is rather  artificial and, as this study will illustrate, ultimately not very useful in explain- ing how a dissident movement positions itself towards the religious tradition  out of which it has emerged. The relationship between the religious main- stream and a charismatic eruption within it can oscillate between being con- frontational and symbiotic. Dissident movements have been embraced with  variable success in order to alleviate their opposition to the religious estab- lishment. The Christian concept of ecclesiola in ecclesia and the Islamic  notion of ikhtila ̄ f al-madha ̄ hib intend to define the religious mainstream in the broadest possible sense in order to appease and to embrace possible dissidents.45

The need of a religious tradition to redefine itself particularly arises when its established institutions become vulnerable and fail to provide identity and security for the members of its community. In such a crisis milieu – although not only then – charismatic movements challenge the authority of the religious mainstream. However, such dissident movements, which secede from the religious establishment by addressing its failure to provide identity and security, do not necessarily constitute a counter-model of the religious mainstream but rather cherish the very values which the tradition is supposed to uphold. Charismatic movements attempt to realise values which
