The need of a religious tradition to redefine itself particularly arises when its established institutions become vulnerable and fail to provide identity and security for the members of its community. In such a crisis milieu – although not only then – charismatic movements challenge the authority of the religious mainstream. However, such dissident movements, which secede from the religious establishment by addressing its failure to provide identity and security, do not necessarily constitute a counter-model of the religious mainstream but rather cherish the very values which the tradition is supposed to uphold. Charismatic movements attempt to realise values which

> The prophet, who was for Weber the epitome of charismatic leadership, based his message on an appeal to an idealised past in order to break with a corrupt present. Charisma may, therefore, be based on traditional norms rather than representing a distinct break with them.47

Charismatic authority is based on divine authority of some sort, but the message its owner proclaims needs to be communicated in the language known to its addressees. Hence, charisma does not really establish a break with the tradition but rather a ‘re-interpretation of known facts and Weltanschauung’, 48 a reinterpretation that can be quite radical. Despite the origin of charismatic  movements in the concealed and obvious aspirations of the religious main- stream, its further development triggered by internal and external factors  might lead to a complete separation, particularly when the charismatic movement undergoes its own process of routinisation. If the mainstream is  not able to accommodate charismatic movements within its own ranks, dissi- dence then leads to a parting of the ways, a religious schism or the creation of  a new religious movement.49

Another problem with Weber’s approach lies in his Christiano-centric per- spective. His dichotomies between church and sect, priesthood and prophecy,  tradition and charisma are not only ideal-typical but also result from his studies of Christian Protestantism. How can Weber’s concepts moulded by Protestant theology be applied to the study of Islam? In Islam, a church organisation and a sacerdotal priesthood do not exist. The authority of the  ulama ̄ -, the closest group in Islam to a genuine clergy, is not derived from  membership in a church organisation but from being in a social group whose religious authority is based on knowledge – knowledge of the Qura ̄n and the sunna of the Prophet, of the sources and methods of jurisprudence and of the  scholarly tradition which has emerged over the centuries.50 This shared edu- cational ethos and experienced socialisation made the ulama ̄ -into a class  with a class consciousness, as Mark Sedgwick suggests, in order to propose ‘the possible identification of the ulama as the Church of Islam.’  51 In contrast  to the ulama ̄ -, other groups favoured charismatic models of religious author- ity, most notably Shii Islam with its line of Imams from among the descendents  of the Prophet, and Sufism with its notion that certain individuals entertain a closer relationship with God. In contrast to the acquired knowledge ( ilm) of  the ulama ̄ -, these individuals possess intuitive knowledge (ma rifa) received  from God by illumination (ishra ̄ q), disclosure (kashf), inspiration (ilha ̄ m) if not revelation (tajallı ̄/wah ̇  ı ̄) itself. Very often one can find the two modes of
