knowledge – traditional and charismatic – conflated in ulama ̄ -who are Sufis  at the same time.52

Despite the problems of translating Weber’s concepts into other cultures and religions, the tension between some form of institutionalised tradition  as embodied and preserved by the ulama ̄ -on the one side and the holders  of charismatic authority on the other also exists in Islam. Weber’s insight  into the creativity and instability of charismatic authority and the subse- quent need to routinise it for its preservation will be used to explain how  Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh moved in opposite directions of religi- ous reform despite their sharing of common origins in Islamic mysticism and  millenarianism.

Routinisation of charisma is understood in a broad sense. This study does not conceive itself as a sociological survey on the institutionalisation of two different religious movements in the nineteenth century. Although the Baha i Faith would offer a textbook example of the Weberian transition from sect to church in the process of the routinisation of charisma, this study is not  primarily interested in the transformation of social and organisational struc- tures.53 The study rather follows one of Weber’s major concerns, as Shmuel  Noah Eisenstadt puts it, the nature of ‘cultural creativity’.  54 It explores the religious and intellectual environment out of which religious and political dissent was articulated in the nineteenth-century Middle East and the role of charismatic authority therein. By attaching themselves to charismatic leaders like Baha ullah and Afghani and traditions of religious dissidence,  Abdul-Baha and Abduh were able to oppose creatively religious traditional- ism. At the same time, they had to experience the instability of charismatic  authority and realised the need to routinise it. In the case of Abduh, it was his alienation from Afghani’s quasi-messianic ideas and his fruitless political activism that made him revert to mainstream Sunnism, albeit in a new guise. Abdul-Baha radicalised the millenarianism of his father’s movement and initiated the formation of the Baha i community as a distinct and new religious  movement. They used very different strategies of routinisation, sharing how- ever an awareness that charismatic authority needs to be disciplined and  ordered in order to ensure that the creative output it has produced can survive in a new stable framework.

# General remark on the nature of Muslim biographical writing

This study uses a variety of original sources on the lives, activities and teach- ings of Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh. Some remarks on the nature  of these sources need to be provided. The discussion will start with some general comments on the nature of biographical writing in the Muslim context – a discussion which will leave aside the general debate on whether there is a  tradition of Muslim (auto)biographical writing or not.55 Discussing the rep- resentation of religious scholars in biographical works, Dale F. Eickelmann  makes a useful distinction between ‘individual’ and ‘person’. The ‘individual’
