denotes the self-reflective human being with his desires, inner thoughts, hopes  and beliefs, while ‘person’ describes the social status attributed to the indi- vidual comprising the expectations, roles and the overall significance that  society credits to the individual. Following these social expectations, a trad- itional biographical account of a Muslim scholar would contain information  on his formal education, the age when he memorised the entire Qura ̄n, the names of his teachers and the books he studied as well his own contributions in the field of religious scholarship. Everything outside the scope of what would define a religious scholar, like other political or commercial activities, would usually be ignored.56

More importantly, biographies lack speculations on the inner thoughts and motives of the individual described. An esoteric tendency within traditional biographies has been noted. Very often, biographers practise taqiyya, the deliberate dissimulation and concealment of the true feelings and beliefs of the portrayed figure. When the religious and political context in which the author is writing might prove unfavourable for such feelings and beliefs and their revelation might harm the reputation of a person, they remain undisclosed.57 Modern biographies in contrast are interested not only in revealing and investigating such hidden intentions of the individual but also  in tracing developments and evolutions within his or her lifespan. The indi- vidual is seen as evolving over time and changing his identity in response  to events in his life. Traditional biographies, however, often attribute ‘fixed qualities’ 58 to the individual without any interest or awareness of possible developments in his personality. The individual is presented as having had for his entire life all the qualities that conform to the social expectations regarding the role he fulfilled in society. Stressing the social person and his conformity with his role in society provides one of the main motivations for writing a biography. There is a certain apologetic drive behind biographical  writing. Biographies serve the purpose of showing the merits and achieve- ments of the portrayed figure, be he a scholar, saint or political leader, and to  create an inspirational image of him for the targeted audience, a source of guidance and emulation for those wishing to follow in his footsteps.59 Hence,  biographies of eminent religious figures are not dispassionate sources of his- torical data but rather hagiographical depictions. Their interest is not in ‘what  actually happened?’ but ‘what must have happened?’ in the life of a scholar or saint so that it corresponds to the social and religious expectations of the audience.

Another important feature to bear in mind in dealing with Muslim bio- graphical works is what has been called the tradition of imitative writing in  Middle Eastern historiographies. Studies of medieval Persian chronicles have shown how later authors reproduced an earlier model text and used it as a standard narrative for their own rendering of the chronicle. From a modern historiographical perspective, such incidents would be classified as cases of plagiarism. However, such a judgement misperceives the actual nature of Middle Eastern historiographical writing. Imitating the works of precursor
