chroniclers acknowledges and preserves their works and also expresses the commitment of later authors to conventions of historical and biographical  writings which had been established earlier.60 However, the imitation of earl- ier works does not merely imply their complete verbatim reproduction. While  earlier narratives are accepted as a template, very often changes to the ori- ginal text are added and certain information is omitted. The alteration of the  model text is often motivated by the concerns and agendas of the later author and his target audience.61 For example, changes in early Safavid chronicles were an important instrument to provide legitimacy for the dynasty. The Sunni origin of the Safavid Sufi order had to be reinterpreted and its founders had to be presented as Twelver Shia, because the Sunni origin of the order and the later Shii commitment of the dynasty contradicted each other.62

The biographical sources used for the reconstruction of the lives of Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh – although all written in the twentieth  century – include the aforementioned characteristics of Middle Eastern his- toriographical and biographical writing. Rather than being interested in  Abdul-Baha and Abduh as individuals with their undisclosed desires and hidden intentions, their biographies provide depictions which conform to the expectations one would have of a saintly leader of a religious community like  Abdul-Baha or a religious scholar like Abduh. Disinterested in develop- ments and changes in their careers and possible tensions in their ideas, the  biographies present Abdul-Baha and Abduh as personalities with fixed qual- ities who throughout their lives laboured for the same objectives and held  the same ideas. Moreover, the biographies serve apologetic and didactic pur- poses. They underline their respective credentials as a charismatic leader of a  religious community and as a religious scholar and also present them as sources of inspiration and emulation. The biographies have to be seen within  the tradition of imitative writing as well, as they repeat conventions of trad- itional Middle Eastern biographies. Several biographies of Abdul-Baha and  Abduh use earlier narratives as templates, imitating and altering them at the same time.

The nature of the sources creates methodological problems. While this study is very much interested in disclosing contradictions, developments and  tensions in the lives of Abdul-Baha and Abduh, the biographical data avail- able does not share this interest. The study intends to place both figures in  unfamiliar territories. Abdul-Baha is positioned within the context of other Middle Eastern reform movements while Abduh is brought into connection with Islamic mysticism and millenarianism. Their biographers were either not interested in these connections or wrote their biographies with the intention of denying them. If one is fortunate, one can find statements from their own hands contained in written correspondence, for example, which counter the narratives of their official biographers. Very often one has to resort to other sources like memoirs or observations of their contemporaries which put the official accounts into a new light. This study will apply a critical reading and analysis of the source material in order to counter the fixed representations
