Abdul-Baha Abbas Effendi (1844–1921) was an Ottoman prisoner at the time of his visit to Beirut. He was the son of the founder of the Baha i Faith, Mirza Husayn Ali Nuri Baha ullah (1817–92) who was exiled from Iran to the Ottoman Empire.

Shakib Arslan notes the differences between Abduh and Abdul-Baha in terms of their religious beliefs. Abduh, the Sunni scholar and reformer,  appears to be miles away theologically from Abdul-Baha, leader of a so- called heretical movement whose founder claims to be a new prophet after  Muhammad. Nevertheless, according to Arslan, the two men held each other in high esteem. But was their encounter in Beirut just accidental? Was their good rapport solely based on the mutual appreciation of their knowledge and characters? Was Abduh aware at all of Abdul-Baha’s affiliation with the Babis? Or did the two men meet in Beirut because they shared more with each other than their common mutual admiration? It will be shown that Abduh met the famous Iranian from Akka at a time when their paths not only crossed accidentally, but when their lives and careers were at an important crossroad which connected both for a moment but led to the parting of their ways in the future.

# Millenarianism and reform in the nineteenth century

Abdul-Baha and Muhammad Abduh belonged to the same generation of Middle Easterners who witnessed the demise of the traditional socio-political order within the region and the questioning of traditional Muslim religiosity  as preserved by its guardians, the ulama ̄ -. The two men were not only passive  observers of the unfolding events but also responded to these changes and tried to influence developments with their own efforts. They lived in a time when the intrusion of Western modernity into the Middle East gained an unprecedented momentum. An increasing awareness of the scientific, military, economic and political dominance of Europe initially triggered responses from Middle Eastern rulers to modernise their countries.

The first state which responded to the supremacy of Europe and initiated a modernisation process was the Ottoman Empire. The period of the Tanz ̇ ı ̄ma ̄ t reforms (1839–76), a series of governmental and legal reforms aiming at  modernising the Ottoman Empire, constituted the beginning of the modern- isation of the Middle East. As the ideological and administrative backbone to  this modernisation policy, the Ottoman sultans sent young diplomats to Europe to build a new Western-educated elite, who would spearhead and formulate the reforms. The Tanz ̇  ı ̄ma ̄ t reforms gave the impetus for the mod- ernisation of Middle Eastern societies and created the intellectual climate for  the acceptance of European ideas and values. The government officials who had been sent to Europe not only returned with the necessary skills to ensure
