the administrative centralisation of the Ottoman Empire but also carried  with them the ideas of European liberalism with notions of popular sover- eignty, constitutionalism and parliamentary democracy.7  Egypt followed the example of the Ottoman Empire and sent young, bright men on educational missions to Europe and supported the creation of Western-style educational  institutions in order to yield a new Western-educated elite for the modernisa- tion of the Middle East.

The ulama ̄ -experienced the new modernisation drive of the secular rulers  as a disruptive force, interfering in their traditional domains of education and law, and depriving them of both the economic and the intellectual sources of  their authority in the long term. In the Ottoman Empire the ulama ̄ -consti- tuted a kind of aristocratic class closely connected with the bureaucratic  apparatus of the government. They provided judges, scribes and other gov- ernment officials and the graduates of their educational institutions had pro- vided the educated elite, governing the country. In the past, secular rulers  turned to them for advice and guidance. Now under the new direction of state administration, they lent their ears to foreign advisors and bureaucrats with secular training. The conservative intellectual climate of the madrasa, which were completely ignored in the drive to modernise educational institutions,  generated ulama ̄ -who were increasingly hostile to the modernisation of  their societies. The ulama ̄ -became an endangered elite and had to realise that  their education was rendered useless in the new modern state bureaucracy. Whereas the state and the new class of modern bureaucrats constituted a group open to change and to the adoption of Western ideas and concepts, the  intellectual orientation of the ulama ̄ -was characterised by conservatism and  aimed to preserve the status quo. 8  Ideologically, reforms were branded as un- Islamic and foreign in origin. However, from a non-ideological perspective,  the ulama ̄ ’s opposition to such reforms stemmed from their legitimate fear of losing their traditional authority in the new socio-political orders which Middle Eastern rulers were so keen to establish.9

Criticism of the nature of the reforms came also from the agents of those reforms themselves. An increasing number of Middle Eastern intellectuals  who came in contact with European thought grew dissatisfied with the direc- tion of the reforms undertaken by the ruling elites. For them, military and  administrative reforms alone were not sufficient and wider-reaching reforms needed to be accomplished. The rulers were interested in creating a powerful, centralised state. Their reform initiatives were often intended to consolidate their autocratic rule. Economic prosperity was sought through establishing  commercial links with Europe and by inviting European advisors to the coun- try. Both the apparent autocracy of Middle Eastern rulers and their increas- ing foreign dependence alienated a number of intellectuals and members of  the state bureaucracy who more and more demanded the introduction of  democratic reforms and the independence from foreign influence. As the for- eign domination of the Middle East gained further momentum in the latter  half of the nineteenth century, many intellectuals and bureaucrats assumed a
