dissident stance towards the regimes in the Middle East opposing their col- laboration with European powers and their utter absolutism. Political liberal- isation was seen as means of gaining independence from both foreign influence  and indigenous autocratic rule.

Intellectually, these reformers had to formulate a position of dissidence against the Middle Eastern sovereigns, who increasingly turned into local agents of European colonialism, and against conservative forces within the religious establishment which denounced any engagement with the modern world as being contrary to the basic tenets of the Islamic tradition. Accusing Middle Eastern regimes of blindly imitating European ideas and concepts, these reformers felt the need for an intellectual reconciliation of such ideas with the Islamic tradition. By tracing modern ideas back to Islam, they could  argue against the conservative opposition to them and against the over- reliance of Middle Eastern regimes on the West. The intellectual reconcili- ation of Islam with modernity would show that neither was it necessary to  collaborate with European powers for the implementation of such reforms nor were they in contradiction to Islam.

Who had the intellectual resources for a thorough reconsideration of the  Islamic tradition? The mainstream of the ulama ̄ -was conservative in attitude  and opposed the adoption of Western ideas as part of the modernisation  process for ideological and non-ideological reasons. As most of the ulama ̄ -were rather unwilling to engage intellectually with the modern world, their  monopoly on religious discourse was challenged by a new class of intel- lectuals who, often coming from a traditional religious background, adopted  a religious tone to justify the introduction of reforms. Many reformers began with a self-reflective analysis of the state of the Muslim world and the reasons for its weakness. This self-diagnosis implied a critique of traditional religious  authority. The ulama ̄ -were blamed for the demise of Islam in the modern  world because their strict adherence to a medieval and outdated scholarly tradition had led to the intellectual stagnation of Muslims. The nature of religious authority was put under scrutiny due to the perceived decline of  Islam attributed to the shortcomings of the religious and political establish- ment. Reformers therefore became both political and religious dissidents and  positioned themselves in opposition to the establishment, asking such ques- tions as: What intellectual traditions of political and religious dissent does  Islam offer? Which alternative models of religious authority allow a creative reinterpretation of the Islamic tradition?

# Origins of religio-political dissent in Islamic messianism


Throughout the history of Islam, dissident movements have opposed the  religious and political establishment. In the same manner as religious dissi- dents had challenged the authority of the ulama ̄ -in the past, nineteenth- century reformers considered traditional Islam as represented by the ulama ̄ -to have fallen short of responding adequately to the challenges of the modern
