world. As intellectuals and bureaucrats in the nineteenth century who fought  against absolutist rule and European colonialism in the Middle East, revo- lutionary movements in Islamic history have combated political regimes  which were perceived as being corrupt, autocratic and immoral. Very often such movements which attached themselves to notions of religo-political authority were felt to be more authentically Islamic.

Since the revolt of Mukhtar al-Thaqafi (685–6) in the name of Muham- mad ibn al-Hanafiyya al-Mahdi -(‘the rightly-guided one’), religious and pol- itical dissent in Islam has found one expression in movements around the  Mahdi, the saviour who would restore Islam and bring true guidance for the Muslim community. The Mahdi, as the divinely appointed charismatic leader of the community, would initiate a return to the perfection of the prophetic age and revive pure and authentic Islam as it existed at the time of the Prophet Muhammad. From the time that Mukhtar revolted against the Umayyad caliph and chose a son of Ali ibn Abi Talib as the right leader of the Muslim community, Mahdis and their messianic movements have appeared in Islamic history as forces of opposition and dissent against the religious and political establishment of their times.

Originally, al-Mahdi -was a political title designating the rightly-guided  leader of the Muslim community who would restore justice and oppose the illegitimate usurpers to the caliphate as embodied by the Umayyad dynasty. The hope for the arrival of such a leader was particularly strong among the early Shia which was in its infancy, a political movement in support of the leadership claims of a member of the Hashimid clan, the clan of the Prophet Muhammad. It was believed that the Mahdi by virtue of being part of the ahl al-bayt, the family of the Prophet, partakes of his charisma and therefore would rule in a similar fashion as the Prophet had. Mukhtar’s revolt in the name of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya initiated a series of Hashimid revolts in the name of or led by a member of the clan of the Prophet. The revolt, which was eventually successful and which overthrew the Umayyad dynasty, resulted  in the Abbasid Revolution of 750. Being descendents of Muhammad’s pater- nal uncle Abbas and therefore members of the Hashimid clan, the Abbasids  appealed to Shii sentiments of religio-political leadership by a member of the family of the Prophet and exploited the notion of a return (dawla) to the prophetic age in their propaganda.10 Once the Abbasids assumed power, they adopted messianic names like al-Saffah, al-Mansur or al-Mahdi as part of their caliphal titles in order to express their charismatic authority.11

Once in power, however, the Abbasids launched severe persecutions against the Shia, seeing them as potential sources for political dissent, who might challenge the Abbasid rule by putting forward a claimant to the leadership who may have been more closely related to the Prophet or even be one of his  direct descendants. The Abbasids turned to the ulama ̄ -and patronised the  formation and consolidation of Sunni Islam which took shape with the com- pilation of canonical traditions attributed to the Prophet, and the emergence  of Islamic jurisprudence and Islamic theology. The ulama ̄ -would prove to be
