a conservative force rejecting political and religious dissent and accepting Abbasid supremacy as necessary for the unity and stability of the Islamic community.12

The radicalism of the Shia was also softened after the Abbasid revolution. As previous Hashimid revolts had failed and the apparent vindication of the Shia with the success of the Abbasid revolution proved to be disastrous for them, more quietist and accommodative models of leadership became more attractive. The descendents of Husayn, the grandson of the Prophet who was killed by the Umayyads in Karbala in 680, abstained from political actions and remained quietist. The Husaynid branch of the Hashimid clan, led by  Muhammad al-Baqir and Ja far al-Sadiq, and its purely religious and apolit- ical understanding of authority transformed the early Shia from a political to  a sectarian movement. For Ja far al-Sadiq, being Imam did not require the  actual possession of political power but rather signified the access to a reposi- tory of hidden knowledge which the Imam receives via divine inspiration in  order to act as a channel of divine guidance for his followers.13

Although the members of the Husaynid branch, who would provide the line of Imams of the later Twelver Shia, refrained from political activism, the initial hope for the rule of the Mahdi was also expressed around them. When Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya died, some of his followers refused to believe that he had died but assumed that he had gone into occultation (ghayba) and would return in the immediate future as the Mahdi and rule over the Islamic community. Similar speculations arose after the death of Ja far al-Sadiq and of his son Musa al-Kazim.14 Some of their followers likewise upheld the belief that they had merely gone into occultation and would return soon to reverse the existing political order. This notion of occultation would prove useful after the death of the 11th Imam Hasan al- Askari and in the ensuing confusion about his succession. Most Shia believed that his son went into occultation and would return in the future as the Mahdi. The adoption of the notion of occultation by the Twelver Shia had three effects. It ultimately  suppressed the tradition of religio-political dissent of the early Shia by post- poning both the return of the Mahdi and the establishment of a just and  legitimate Islamic government to the distant future. The eschatological con- notations of the Mahdi also became more pronounced as he would appear  shortly before the Day of Judgement. Finally, with the end of the line of the  Imams, the ulama ̄ -assumed religious authority and, as their Sunni counter- parts had done before, formed the Twelver Shia as a religious sect by compil- ing traditions attributed to the Imams and developing Shii jurisprudence and  theology. The dissident nature of the early Shia was finally forsaken, hence allowing the Shia to assimilate into the Muslim mainstream.

# Shii messianic movements and Sufisim

Certain groups within the Shia upheld a dissident stance towards mainstream Islam and offered alternative models of religious authority which challenged
