the religious monopoly of the ulama ̄ -and which were more inclined towards  individualised and charismatic forms of leadership as existed with the early Shia. A more radical offshoot of the Shia, who believed in the transfer of the Imamate from Ja far al-Sadiq to his eldest son Ismail, preserved early Shii religio-political dissidence. While initially believing in the occultation and eventual return of Ismail’s son Muhammad as Mahdi, leaders of the Ismailis  later claimed descent from Muhammad ibn Ismail and announced them- selves to be the promised Mahdi. The messianic claims of Sa id ibn Husayn,  who took the name Ubaydullah al-Mahdi in 909, led to the foundation of the Fatimid dynasty which challenged the claims of the Abbasids to the caliphate for almost two centuries. The messianic claims of the leaders of the Nizari branch of the Ismailis with their headquarters in Alamut in northern Iran in the eleventh and twelfth centuries were likewise utilised to oppose the existing political order in a militant struggle led by the Imam-Mahdi. Unlike the mainstream Shia, which considered the line of the Imams to have terminated  with the 12th Imam, the Ismailis believed in the continuation of their charis- matic authority and thereby preserved the tradition of religio-political dis- sent of the early Shia. For the Ismailis, there always has to be a single living  personification of divine guidance, a proof (h  ̇ ujja) of God on earth.15 Ismailism  provided both a political and intellectual alternative for those Muslims dis- content with the Abbasid caliphate and the emerging Sunni traditionalism  and disappointed by the quietism the Twelver Shia had adopted. The Ismaili  Imams offered charismatic and messianic authority that allowed the continu- ation of divine communication with humanity. Furthermore, Ismaili thought  was more open towards rationalism and the Greek philosophical heritage and therefore appealed to Muslim intellectuals who could not identify with the  traditionalist orientations of Sunni and Twelver Shii ulama ̄ -.  16

Although politically less radical, another group also offered an alternative notion of religious authority – a model of religious authority that was also charismatic and akin to the religious authority of the Shii Imams. Mystical  Islam or Sufism challenged the authority of the ulama ̄ -and their rather  literalist and legalist approach to the Qura ̄n offering, similar to the Ismailis,  more esoteric readings of scripture that aimed at revealing its hidden mean- ings. The Sufis invested authority in the friends of God (awliya ̄ alla ̄ h), people  who were considered to be close to God, and put the Perfect Man (al-insa ̄ n al-ka ̄ mil) on top of a hierarchy of saints. The Perfect Man as the Sufi saint closest to God would, in imitation of the Prophet and similar to the Shii Imams, act as a mediator between God and humanity and would provide divine guidance, and hence be rightly-guided in a spiritual and intellectual sense.17 Sufism as a religious movement within Islam transcended sectarian boundaries and introduced charismatic authority as an alternative to the  scholarly authority of the ulama ̄ -to both Shia and Sunnis. Sufi notions of  charismatic authority could be used to express disillusionment with the  religious establishment as embodied by the ulama ̄ -and implicitly contain  ‘the messianic expectation of the human leader, divinely or rationally guided,
