who would restore order and justice and establish the ideal rule of the Sage.’ 18

The amalgamation of Sufism, Ismaili political activism and Shii messian- ism led to a proliferation of messianic movements in the fourteenth and  fifteenth centuries during and after the frail rule of the Ilkhanid dynasty in Iran (1256–1353). One of the earliest was initiated by Fazlullah Astarabadi (d. 1394) who claimed to be not only the Mahdi but also an agent of divine  revelation. While he was initially concerned with extracting the hidden spirit- ual message from the Qura ̄n by employing esoteric interpretative techniques  based on the letters of the Qura ̄nic text, the persecution of the members of the heretical Hurufi sect – as they were called – led to their politicisation and militant activism. The messianic claims of Sayyid Muhammad Nurbakhsh (d. 1463) were of a similar nature. Stemming from the environment of Shii  Sufism like Fazlullah, Nurbakhsh’s claims of being the Mahdi were com- bined with his spiritual identification with prophetic figures of the past like  Jesus and Muhammad. Like the Hurufi sect, Nurbakhsh was not primarily interested in seizing political power as part of his messianic mission but devoted much of his time to teaching the mystical path towards God. A consciously political and militant expression of Shii messianism was the  movement initiated by his contemporary Sayyid Muhammad ibn Falah al- Musha sha  (‘the radiant’) (d. 1461 or 1465) who managed to rally the Arab  tribes of Southern Iraq in a revolt against the local rule of the Turcoman Qaraqoyunlu tribe.19

The mystical-cum-messianic movements, which combined claims to cha- rismatic authority with political activism, provided the background out of  which the Safavid Order under the leadership of Ismail managed to conquer Iran and to establish the Safavid dynasty.20 Once the Safavids captured power in Iran, the heretical claims to the charismatic authority of Ismail and the later shahs of the Safavid dynasty had to be de-emphasised. The Safavids’  turn to Twelver Shiism can be understood as a move to routinise their cha- rismatic authority in the transformation of the Safavid Order from a mes- sianic movement to the ruling dynasty. The early Safavid Shahs realised that  the messianic nature of their religio-political authority was useful in initiating a revolution but could not provide a stable ideological foundation for the organisation of a state.21

Despite the suppression of Sufi messianism under the institutionalised  religion of the ulama ̄ -, mystical and esoteric strands of Shii Islam could  survive in Safavid Iran and found exponents in the School of Isfahan. The  yearning for alternative modes of religio-political authority found expres- sion in the representatives of this theosophical school like Mulla Sadra  (1572–1641). Similar to the Sufis, Mulla Sadra upheld the divine guidance of the Perfect Man who had been embodied by the Prophets and Imams in the past and who could be embodied by anyone who reaches the final stages of the mystical journey towards God. Although always placed in the margins of Shii religiosity, the esotericism of the School of Isfahan and its orientation
