# Decolonial anxieties in a postcolonial world: an interview withAchille Mbembe

## Joseph Confavreux

## MediaPart, France

In his latest book, philosopher Achille Mbembe recasts the notion of‘brutalism’drawnfrom architecture in order to describe a contemporary situation in which humanity’sessence is transformed at the same time as its very existence is threatened

In this interview, Mbembe also responds to the anxieties expressed in many a news-paper column over postcolonial and decolonial discourses, as well as the recent reconfi-gurations of identity politics.

**Joseph Confavreux (J.C.): This book is dedicated to your‘three countries, in equalparts’. How far did they feed into your book–and how did each of them hold up?**

**Achille Mbembe (A.M.)**: Not all of them come out of it as well as the others. Withoutdoubt, the one that comes out of it worst is Cameroon, which I deal with in barelyveiled terms in a chapter explicitly entitled‘The Community of Captives’. South Africais also present in many passages in the book, especially those that I devote to the bothcrucial and futile question of identity. Senegal, doubtless the one that comes out of itbest, is present in the passages that talk about what I call the dis-enclosure [déclosion]of the world–that is, the abandonment of the desire for borders, and the possibilityof a world unlocked out onto the open.

But beyond these three national territories, I also sought to address the‘big questions’of our time and reflect on the situation of life–living things–today. At the beginning ofthe twenty-first century, as the Earth never stops burning and some seek to force through
the project of an infinite extension of capital, both human societies and living things as awhole are being reconfigured by the yardstick of digital technology. Old debates onhuman nature are coming back to the surface and I wanted to take part in them–startingfrom my own moorings in Africa, of course, but also starting out from the position ofsomeone who has constantly been criss-crossing the world these last 25 years.

**J.C.: In your book, we also see your two adoptive countries, France and the UnitedStates...**

**A.M.:** We can’t skirt around them or get tired of them–condemned as we are tofightsimultaneously both with and against them. But beyond all these geo-national entities,the central question is the becoming of the human in a period of our history character-ized by an irreversible escalation of technology. I am particularly thinking of what we canterm the‘computational turn’in our lives, that is, the conversion of material productioninto digital production, as well as the new forms of exhaustion resulting from the trans-formation of the economy into neurobiology. This forges a reality centred on the indi-vidual ego as thefinal mooring point of any ontology, of all existence

We are, therefore, on the brink of an unprecedented rupture. The process currentlyunderway risks driving the birth of a biosynthetic humanity susceptible to encoding.Such a humanity has little to do with theflesh and blood individuals endowed withreason which we inherited from the so-called Age of Enlightenment. This downloadingof the living and the non-living, or even of consciousness itself, into increasingly artificialformats and ever more dematerialized mechanisms–and this against the backdrop ofthe infinite extension of the market and the combustion of the planet–fundamentallyputs back into question the form of organizing our common life known as democracy.Moreover, amidst all this tumult, many no longer shy from speaking of‘illiberal’or‘author-itarian democracies’.Forme,theterm‘brutalism’summarizes simultaneously both thisprocessandthemeasureofforcewhichtheadventofthisnewfigure of the human requires.

**J.C.: In what sense are we seeing unprecedentedfigures of the human appear?**

**A.M.**:Since the beginning of modern times and the arrival in a new technological era, wehave believed that our happiness, our freedom and our good health necessitated a sharpseparation between the world of humans and the world of objects. Human persons, wethought, could not be fashioned or treated like objects or tools. Most of the great eman-cipatory struggles waged over recent centuries were driven by the dream of unshacklinghumanity from the universe of matter, objects and nature, in a sharp separation betweenour species and all the rest. Alienation, conversely, consisted of the merger of the humansubject and the object.

Today, this separation between the human subject and the world of animate and inan-imate objects is no longer entirely at the basis of the idea of human liberation and of uni-versalism. Now that the relationship between means and ends has been turned inside out,what, rather, more prevails is the idea that the human is the product of technology, oreven a simple economic agent that one can use as one pleases–and, moreover, whosedesires and expectations can be anticipated, her behavioursfixed and her fundamentaltraits sculpted. Everything, including consciousness itself, is being reduced to matter.

In short, there is, it would seem, no longer anything that cannot be organized by artefacts.Everything then becomes a pure consumer choice, in a world and a universe that arenothing but a vast market stall.

One path I constantly explore in this book is to reinterrogate the status of the humanand the object in this new secular religion. To this end, I make recourse to certain so-called‘non-Western’traditions, in particular to those metaphysics sometimes dismissedby calling them‘animist’. Indeed, pre-colonial African metaphysics as well as Amerin-dian metaphysics allow us to formulate a combination of hypotheses able to de-dramatizethe human/object relationship. This is especially possible because these metaphysics areless dichotomous than those elaborated in the West, with its dichotomies of nature/culture, subject/object and human/nonhuman.

Nonetheless, the return to these oldfigures of animism isn’t without its risks–especially in this current moment, where reasonfinds itself under siege, and it is absol-utely imperative that we hone our critical faculties. The critique of reason must, there-fore,  be  distinguished  from  a  war  against  reason;  this,  even  though  manycontemporary political engagements are based on a supposed rehabilitation of theaffects, of personal experience, of feelings and emotions, and take the form of visceralstruggles. Most of the identitarian struggles that animate politics today make up partof this configuration. In my view, they will divert us from the essential problems weface if they only aim to demarcate frontiers and if they are not explicitly articulated toa wider, more planetary design: namely, to repair the world itself.

**J.C.: Identitarian struggles emerged from minorities but have been reformulated bythe hard Right–often to the detriment of these same minorities. How do you seewhat the Americans call‘identity politics’?**

**A.M**: Identitarian struggles are no longer the monopoly of minorities–indeed, I’d ques-tion whether they ever have been. In Europe, in particular, people of so-called‘Europeanstock’have always profited from the wages of autochthony. The whole history of racismboils down to a permanent battle to consolidate this unearned advantage.

That said, there was a moment in recent history during which struggles for identity didmake up part of general struggles for human emancipation: such was the case of thestruggles to abolish slavery and colonialism, of the struggles for women’s liberation, ofthe US Civil Rights struggles, and the struggles against Apartheid in South Africa.Such struggles’ultimate goal was not to mark differences. They were,first and foremost,struggles for the recognition of the greater number, of each and of all, as humans amongother humans, called on together with these others to build a world that all can inhabit.What was at stake, here, was to build something that could be shared as equitably as poss-ible, that is, because it had to do with an original, foundational‘something in common’.These struggles were thus endowed with a major coefficient of universalism–if, that is,by‘universal’we mean the possibility of making a world-in-common, and not making aworld to the advantage only of some or a world made regardless of, despite or againstothers.

For this reason, the current debates on the notions of the universal and universalism,communalism or separatism are an utter trap. Often these categories are mobilized in thebarely masked objective of defending the‘indigenous’and preserving the unearned
advantages thatflow from it. The same goes for the endlessly rehashed controversieswhose function is to dirty the name of postcolonial and decolonial theories. For thosewho have taken the time to read and translate postcolonial texts–which aren’t exactlythe same thing as decolonial discourse–it is obvious that most of these are hardlyexpressions of identity politics.

In truth–paradoxically–so-called postcolonial theories ought to be interpreted as thelatest avatars of a certain tradition of Western humanism: a critical and inclusive human-ism. It isthesediscourses that champion cosmopolitanism and clearly oppose auto-chthony. Their intention is precisely to extend this critical humanism to a planetaryscale, denying that it should remain the privilege of the West alone. This is the reasonwhy–although I make no claim to be a theorist of the postcolonial–I am amazedthat some here [in France] try to characterize postcolonial theories as particularist dis-course calling for separation or for us to turn in on ourselves.

**J.C.:  What  differences  would  you  point  to  between  the  postcolonial  and  thedecolonial?**

**A.M**: Postcolonial currents speak up for a cosmopolitan and hybrid world. And it’snoaccident that this discourse has often been theorized by exiles, by migrants, by statelesspeople like Edward Said, nomads from the Indian subcontinent like Gayatri Spivak andDipesh Chakrabarty, theorists of the‘Tout-Monde’like Édouard Glissant or championsof a‘planetary humanism’like Paul Gilroy. They’ve all opposed any form of essentialism.We don’tfind a celebration of particularism, communalism or autochthony among anyof them.

hat unites them is their interest in the historical event that was the encounterbetween heterogeneous worlds–an encounter that took place in the course of theslave trade, colonization, commerce, migration and population movements (includingforced ones), evangelism, the circulation of forms and ideas. Postcolonial currents inter-rogated what this encounter had, in its multiple modalities, produced–the share of rein-vention, adjustments and recompositions that it demanded from all the protagonists, theplay of ambivalences, the mimetism and resistance which it made possible.

I think that decolonial discourse, especially as it has been theorized by Latin Ameri-cans, is something else. It puts on trial‘Western reason’, its historical forms of predationand the genocidal impulse inherent to modern colonialism. What decolonial theoristscall the‘coloniality of power’refers not only to mechanisms for exploiting and predatingupon bodies, natural resources and living things. It is also the false belief according towhich there is just one knowledge, a single site for the production of truth, one universal,and, outside of that, only superstitions. Decolonial discourse wants to tear apart this sortof monism and overthrow this means of bulldozing the different knowledges, practicesand forms of existence.

I do not want to set up a complete opposition between postcolonial and decolonial,which are, in fact, in dialogue with each other. But we ought to identify the lines oftension that do exist, and see that they do not set out from the same concepts and cat-egories, that they do not elaborate the same arguments, and perhaps they do not setthemselves the same political objectives.
**J.C.: Can we escape a political configuration where questions of identity seem to havebecome the main coordinates?**

**A.M**: We shouldn’t sweepingly dismiss the whole question. But in many regards, theidentitarian struggles of our times are the new opium of the people, among elites aswell as the masses. Moreover, neoliberalism is very well able to accommodate to them.These identitarian struggles make up part of two of the defining logics of the present era.

Thefirst logic is governed by a desire for boundaries, which goes hand-in-hand withwhat might seem a commendable desire to take back one’s own self. But this is afetishized self, a consumable self, totally bound to its dreams, its feelings, its emotions,its body, against the backdrop of a mass narcissism relayed by digital technology. Thisfigure of the self is a decisive cog in the project for the infinite expansion of themarket, in this era dominated by the reflex of quantity–one in which selling imagesby way of images seems to have become the ultimate meaning of life.

The second logic is marked by a deep desire for partition, separation and secession.The propensity toward endogamy is a powerful characteristic of our era. Many nolonger want to live outside their own bubbles and echo chambers, among themselves,with those like them. The practices of excommunication and quarantine have made acomeback. This is plain to see, and hear, in the carceral landscape that wefind increas-ingly pock-marks the planet: territorial segmentation and fragmentation, camps, enclaves–all mechanisms designed to separate people and cut the ties between them.

By that, I do not mean to imply any symmetry between the‘identities’held up as abanner by the radicalized right, and those in which minorities wrap themselves (sometimesfor want of anything else to defend). But I fear that in such a context no politics based onidentity can have a sufficient coefficient of universality such as would allow us to create thenecessary coalitions to stand together in effectively meeting the great planetary challenges.

**J.C.: How far is this desire for secession–which is not exactly the same thing as adesire for domination–transforming the way we think about contemporary politics?**

**A.M**: ew mechanisms of domination are constantly emerging. Most are abstract anddematerialized–this, even if matter, bodies and nerves are still their main targets. Pre-dation, draining and extraction remain the rule, as does the recourse to brute force. Butthe new domination also operates implicitly, through the proliferation of means of sur-veillance, the use of technological ingenuity, the practices that set each of us in compe-tition with everyone else, and the revision of laws in order to extend capital’s reach.Today, domination proceeds through all these avenues, and even more so through thedraining of the critical faculties, the drying up of the imaginaries that would be necessaryfor refounding a project for life, and living at the planetary scale. That is what is currentlyunderway, and what I call brutalism. It’s not spontaneous–it’s planned and calculated.

Faced with all this, many continue to resist. But Ifind two responses in particular arestriking. Thefirst is the reflex toflee. In some parts of the world,flight is coming to looklike a real mass movement. Mass migrations and desertions are potential weapons. Theworld’s powerful have well understood this and are trying to combat these phenomena ofdefection by ramping up the number of camps and an unequal distribution of the abilityto move and travel.
The second response is the reflex of secession. If the rich could emigrate to otherplanets and set up new colonies in which no poor people would be admitted, theywould do so. For the powerful, the main obsession now is how they can get rid ofthose whom they think are nothing and count for nothing. This desire for secessionmarks a rupture compared to previous periods characterized by conquest. What CarlSchmitt called‘seizing land’is today succeeded by the building of fortifications.

The classic political question of the modern period was built around the right toappropriation, the right to conquest, occupation and colonization. Added to this,today, therefore, is another question: what fate should be reserved for those who havenothing and who are, for that very reason, considered asbeingnothing. The great con-temporary problem is what to do with those considered to count for nothing, or not formuch, and whose contemporaryfigure is that of the migrant. What juridical status, whatmechanism, what treatment should be put in place for those who are, in practice, reducedto the level of mere waste? Andfinally, who does the world belong to? That’s the essentialpolitical question posed in the era of what I call‘brutalism’

**J.C.:  How  does  this  architectural  metaphor  help  us  think  through  the  presentmoment?**

**A.M**: This term refers to a way of distributing force, of applying it to materials–in par-ticular concrete–in order to give them a form we hope will last a long time, if not makeup part of what can never be destroyed. It is thus a calculated and planned destructionoperation whose ultimate purpose is to build the indestructible.

So, outside of architecture, the concept of brutalism can be understood as a forcing ofbodies which are treated as concrete, subjecting them to a combination of pressures. Bru-talism is the program which consists of reducing all that exists to the category of objectsand matter, integrated into the sphere of calculation. This is integral functionalism, a wayof organizing the recourse to force.

Re-interpreting it in this light, the concept of brutalism allows me to reinterrogate notso much the (already widely documented) sociology of violence in the neoliberal era, butrather to understand the dynamic of the contemporary moment. In my view, this is amoment characterized by the escalation of technology, the transformation of economyinto neurobiology and the appearance of digital bodies made up of metal and other pros-thetics–which are also cogs of capital–as well asflesh

**J.C.: The term could also bring to mind the German-American historian GeorgeL. Mosse’s analyses of the‘brutalization’of European societies, between the GreatWar and the totalitarian regimes. To put it briefly, Mosse’s reasoning was that thelogics of war had extended into peace time, ultimately resulting in fascism. Whenyou speak of contemporary brutalism, is this a way of drawing a parallel with ahistory which consisted of the banalization of violence, the resurgence of nationalismand a rapid downward spiral?**

**A.M**: No. Of course, I’ve read the texts of Mosse, Jünger and others, but I’ve also readworks starting from the inverse hypothesis, holding that the history of European societiesis a long history of‘pacification’or, as Norbert Elias put it, the‘civilizing process’. In this

view, even if violence has not been entirely eradicated, it has been domesticated and sub-limated. We should also mention a third family of considerations which underline thatthis‘civilizing’process was possible only because the potential for violence internal toEuropean societies was turned outward to other places, like the colonies.

My intention is not to repeat any of these three currents of analysis. Rather, it is tograsp an unprecedented moment of our present which is marked, above all, by a techno-logical acceleration without precedent in human history. This acceleration does not onlybring an implosion of our conceptions of time. It implicitly outlines the advent of a newregime of historicity, which I call‘chronophagic’, because it devours time in general andin particular the future, at the same time as it builds up a systematic amnesia. Time assuch is replaced byflux and noise.

These technologies have also pushed back the frontiers of speed, making it a comp-lement to power and a key resource in struggles for sovereignty. Moreover, in thisnew regime of historicity there is no longer anything human that is not also consumable,that is to say, which escapes the realm of calculation. Even more so, there is no longeranything human that does not have a digital double. Capital now seeks to extend itsgrip not only to the bottom of the ocean or to the stars, but also to atoms, cells andneurons.

**J.C.: In what sense does Africa, as what you call a‘reserve of strength [puissance] andstrength in reserve’constitute, if not the panacea, at least a space of possibilities forthe future of humanity, which today seems so fragile?**

**A.M**: Firstly, on account of its physique, its monumentality, which continues to fascinateme. It is a gigantic continent, and it’d be hard to convince me that this extensiveness, thisgigantism, the fact that it occupies such an eminent place in the planetary mass, all meansnothing. Even if I don’t know what this extensiveness really means, Ifind it intriguing. 

Speaking of its physique, I would also like to refer to what Africa contains, or holds instore–by which of course I mean humans. Their numbers will keep on growing at leasttill the end of this century, and it is doubtless here that the most phenomenal changes willtake place. Living humanity, in its multiplicity and in its most multicoloured character,will have one of its vastest abodes in Africa. To speak of what Africa contains is not,however, only to speak of the different species populating its surface, but also to thinkof its rivers, forests, mountains, sun, savannahs, of deserts which are not at all desertedand everything wefind in its subsoil and at the bottom of the oceans surrounding it: rareminerals, precious stones...

There is also, most importantly, a vast reserve of elements, many of which remainunknown–forces critical for the future history of life on Earth in the Anthropoceneera. The colossal character of what we don’t yet know on this continent, of that whichstill escapes calculation and appropriation, is the second important factor which leadsme to think that Africa represents strength-in-reserve for the entire Earth

Recently I was in Kinshasa and before I set offagain I spent two hours watching theriver Congoflow past. Impressive were the sheer volume of water and its power–wedon’t know how long they have existed and how long they will last. But as I contemplatedthe river, it was difficult for me not to feel, in my ownflesh, the turbulent stirring ofuntamed forces and energy–ones which perhaps can’t even be tamed. For me, Africa
is that. The big question is how to free up these energies, these deposits of life, deposits ofa thousand-faceted life, for the good of Africans but also the good of all humanity.

What we need is to imagine new models of life and living which will allow the refoun-dation of a politics that stands outside the religion of the market and its corollary in con-sumption-hedonism. Perhaps, here, African metaphysics have something to offer,another starting point, starting from the certainty that the human is not just matter.In the human there exists an incalculable, inappropriable dimension, which does notonly belong to the realm of physical-chemical processes–in short, a dimension thatyou can’t download into artificial devices

That is why we should treat idolizing technology [technolâtrie] and collapsology astwins. A smoother landing is not the only option available to us. When we look at awider set of archives and draw on a wider array of materials, we willfind the experiencesof peoples who have been able to create life on the basis of objectively unliveable situ-ations. That provides no guarantees, in terms of the future. But it does at least remindus that everything is in our own hands. And that is key, at a time when the prevalentfeeling is that everything is now getting out of our control.
