the project of an infinite extension of capital, both human societies and living things as awhole are being reconfigured by the yardstick of digital technology. Old debates onhuman nature are coming back to the surface and I wanted to take part in them–startingfrom my own moorings in Africa, of course, but also starting out from the position ofsomeone who has constantly been criss-crossing the world these last 25 years.

**J.C.: In your book, we also see your two adoptive countries, France and the UnitedStates...**

**A.M.:** We can’t skirt around them or get tired of them–condemned as we are tofightsimultaneously both with and against them. But beyond all these geo-national entities,the central question is the becoming of the human in a period of our history character-ized by an irreversible escalation of technology. I am particularly thinking of what we canterm the‘computational turn’in our lives, that is, the conversion of material productioninto digital production, as well as the new forms of exhaustion resulting from the trans-formation of the economy into neurobiology. This forges a reality centred on the indi-vidual ego as thefinal mooring point of any ontology, of all existence

We are, therefore, on the brink of an unprecedented rupture. The process currentlyunderway risks driving the birth of a biosynthetic humanity susceptible to encoding.Such a humanity has little to do with theflesh and blood individuals endowed withreason which we inherited from the so-called Age of Enlightenment. This downloadingof the living and the non-living, or even of consciousness itself, into increasingly artificialformats and ever more dematerialized mechanisms–and this against the backdrop ofthe infinite extension of the market and the combustion of the planet–fundamentallyputs back into question the form of organizing our common life known as democracy.Moreover, amidst all this tumult, many no longer shy from speaking of‘illiberal’or‘author-itarian democracies’.Forme,theterm‘brutalism’summarizes simultaneously both thisprocessandthemeasureofforcewhichtheadventofthisnewfigure of the human requires.

**J.C.: In what sense are we seeing unprecedentedfigures of the human appear?**

**A.M.**:Since the beginning of modern times and the arrival in a new technological era, wehave believed that our happiness, our freedom and our good health necessitated a sharpseparation between the world of humans and the world of objects. Human persons, wethought, could not be fashioned or treated like objects or tools. Most of the great eman-cipatory struggles waged over recent centuries were driven by the dream of unshacklinghumanity from the universe of matter, objects and nature, in a sharp separation betweenour species and all the rest. Alienation, conversely, consisted of the merger of the humansubject and the object.

Today, this separation between the human subject and the world of animate and inan-imate objects is no longer entirely at the basis of the idea of human liberation and of uni-versalism. Now that the relationship between means and ends has been turned inside out,what, rather, more prevails is the idea that the human is the product of technology, oreven a simple economic agent that one can use as one pleases–and, moreover, whosedesires and expectations can be anticipated, her behavioursfixed and her fundamentaltraits sculpted. Everything, including consciousness itself, is being reduced to matter.

