The second response is the reflex of secession. If the rich could emigrate to otherplanets and set up new colonies in which no poor people would be admitted, theywould do so. For the powerful, the main obsession now is how they can get rid ofthose whom they think are nothing and count for nothing. This desire for secessionmarks a rupture compared to previous periods characterized by conquest. What CarlSchmitt called‘seizing land’is today succeeded by the building of fortifications.

The classic political question of the modern period was built around the right toappropriation, the right to conquest, occupation and colonization. Added to this,today, therefore, is another question: what fate should be reserved for those who havenothing and who are, for that very reason, considered asbeingnothing. The great con-temporary problem is what to do with those considered to count for nothing, or not formuch, and whose contemporaryfigure is that of the migrant. What juridical status, whatmechanism, what treatment should be put in place for those who are, in practice, reducedto the level of mere waste? Andfinally, who does the world belong to? That’s the essentialpolitical question posed in the era of what I call‘brutalism’

**J.C.:  How  does  this  architectural  metaphor  help  us  think  through  the  presentmoment?**

**A.M**: This term refers to a way of distributing force, of applying it to materials–in par-ticular concrete–in order to give them a form we hope will last a long time, if not makeup part of what can never be destroyed. It is thus a calculated and planned destructionoperation whose ultimate purpose is to build the indestructible.

So, outside of architecture, the concept of brutalism can be understood as a forcing ofbodies which are treated as concrete, subjecting them to a combination of pressures. Bru-talism is the program which consists of reducing all that exists to the category of objectsand matter, integrated into the sphere of calculation. This is integral functionalism, a wayof organizing the recourse to force.

Re-interpreting it in this light, the concept of brutalism allows me to reinterrogate notso much the (already widely documented) sociology of violence in the neoliberal era, butrather to understand the dynamic of the contemporary moment. In my view, this is amoment characterized by the escalation of technology, the transformation of economyinto neurobiology and the appearance of digital bodies made up of metal and other pros-thetics–which are also cogs of capital–as well asflesh

**J.C.: The term could also bring to mind the German-American historian GeorgeL. Mosse’s analyses of the‘brutalization’of European societies, between the GreatWar and the totalitarian regimes. To put it briefly, Mosse’s reasoning was that thelogics of war had extended into peace time, ultimately resulting in fascism. Whenyou speak of contemporary brutalism, is this a way of drawing a parallel with ahistory which consisted of the banalization of violence, the resurgence of nationalismand a rapid downward spiral?**

**A.M**: No. Of course, I’ve read the texts of Mosse, Jünger and others, but I’ve also readworks starting from the inverse hypothesis, holding that the history of European societiesis a long history of‘pacification’or, as Norbert Elias put it, the‘civilizing process’. In this

