advantages thatflow from it. The same goes for the endlessly rehashed controversieswhose function is to dirty the name of postcolonial and decolonial theories. For thosewho have taken the time to read and translate postcolonial texts–which aren’t exactlythe same thing as decolonial discourse–it is obvious that most of these are hardlyexpressions of identity politics.

In truth–paradoxically–so-called postcolonial theories ought to be interpreted as thelatest avatars of a certain tradition of Western humanism: a critical and inclusive human-ism. It isthesediscourses that champion cosmopolitanism and clearly oppose auto-chthony. Their intention is precisely to extend this critical humanism to a planetaryscale, denying that it should remain the privilege of the West alone. This is the reasonwhy–although I make no claim to be a theorist of the postcolonial–I am amazedthat some here [in France] try to characterize postcolonial theories as particularist dis-course calling for separation or for us to turn in on ourselves.

**J.C.:  What  differences  would  you  point  to  between  the  postcolonial  and  thedecolonial?**

**A.M**: Postcolonial currents speak up for a cosmopolitan and hybrid world. And it’snoaccident that this discourse has often been theorized by exiles, by migrants, by statelesspeople like Edward Said, nomads from the Indian subcontinent like Gayatri Spivak andDipesh Chakrabarty, theorists of the‘Tout-Monde’like Édouard Glissant or championsof a‘planetary humanism’like Paul Gilroy. They’ve all opposed any form of essentialism.We don’tfind a celebration of particularism, communalism or autochthony among anyof them.

hat unites them is their interest in the historical event that was the encounterbetween heterogeneous worlds–an encounter that took place in the course of theslave trade, colonization, commerce, migration and population movements (includingforced ones), evangelism, the circulation of forms and ideas. Postcolonial currents inter-rogated what this encounter had, in its multiple modalities, produced–the share of rein-vention, adjustments and recompositions that it demanded from all the protagonists, theplay of ambivalences, the mimetism and resistance which it made possible.

I think that decolonial discourse, especially as it has been theorized by Latin Ameri-cans, is something else. It puts on trial‘Western reason’, its historical forms of predationand the genocidal impulse inherent to modern colonialism. What decolonial theoristscall the‘coloniality of power’refers not only to mechanisms for exploiting and predatingupon bodies, natural resources and living things. It is also the false belief according towhich there is just one knowledge, a single site for the production of truth, one universal,and, outside of that, only superstitions. Decolonial discourse wants to tear apart this sortof monism and overthrow this means of bulldozing the different knowledges, practicesand forms of existence.

I do not want to set up a complete opposition between postcolonial and decolonial,which are, in fact, in dialogue with each other. But we ought to identify the lines oftension that do exist, and see that they do not set out from the same concepts and cat-egories, that they do not elaborate the same arguments, and perhaps they do not setthemselves the same political objectives.
