In short, there is, it would seem, no longer anything that cannot be organized by artefacts.Everything then becomes a pure consumer choice, in a world and a universe that arenothing but a vast market stall.

One path I constantly explore in this book is to reinterrogate the status of the humanand the object in this new secular religion. To this end, I make recourse to certain so-called‘non-Western’traditions, in particular to those metaphysics sometimes dismissedby calling them‘animist’. Indeed, pre-colonial African metaphysics as well as Amerin-dian metaphysics allow us to formulate a combination of hypotheses able to de-dramatizethe human/object relationship. This is especially possible because these metaphysics areless dichotomous than those elaborated in the West, with its dichotomies of nature/culture, subject/object and human/nonhuman.

Nonetheless, the return to these oldfigures of animism isn’t without its risks–especially in this current moment, where reasonfinds itself under siege, and it is absol-utely imperative that we hone our critical faculties. The critique of reason must, there-fore,  be  distinguished  from  a  war  against  reason;  this,  even  though  manycontemporary political engagements are based on a supposed rehabilitation of theaffects, of personal experience, of feelings and emotions, and take the form of visceralstruggles. Most of the identitarian struggles that animate politics today make up partof this configuration. In my view, they will divert us from the essential problems weface if they only aim to demarcate frontiers and if they are not explicitly articulated toa wider, more planetary design: namely, to repair the world itself.

**J.C.: Identitarian struggles emerged from minorities but have been reformulated bythe hard Right–often to the detriment of these same minorities. How do you seewhat the Americans call‘identity politics’?**

**A.M**: Identitarian struggles are no longer the monopoly of minorities–indeed, I’d ques-tion whether they ever have been. In Europe, in particular, people of so-called‘Europeanstock’have always profited from the wages of autochthony. The whole history of racismboils down to a permanent battle to consolidate this unearned advantage.

That said, there was a moment in recent history during which struggles for identity didmake up part of general struggles for human emancipation: such was the case of thestruggles to abolish slavery and colonialism, of the struggles for women’s liberation, ofthe US Civil Rights struggles, and the struggles against Apartheid in South Africa.Such struggles’ultimate goal was not to mark differences. They were,first and foremost,struggles for the recognition of the greater number, of each and of all, as humans amongother humans, called on together with these others to build a world that all can inhabit.What was at stake, here, was to build something that could be shared as equitably as poss-ible, that is, because it had to do with an original, foundational‘something in common’.These struggles were thus endowed with a major coefficient of universalism–if, that is,by‘universal’we mean the possibility of making a world-in-common, and not making aworld to the advantage only of some or a world made regardless of, despite or againstothers.

For this reason, the current debates on the notions of the universal and universalism,communalism or separatism are an utter trap. Often these categories are mobilized in thebarely masked objective of defending the‘indigenous’and preserving the unearned
