**J.C.: Can we escape a political configuration where questions of identity seem to havebecome the main coordinates?**

**A.M**: We shouldn’t sweepingly dismiss the whole question. But in many regards, theidentitarian struggles of our times are the new opium of the people, among elites aswell as the masses. Moreover, neoliberalism is very well able to accommodate to them.These identitarian struggles make up part of two of the defining logics of the present era.

Thefirst logic is governed by a desire for boundaries, which goes hand-in-hand withwhat might seem a commendable desire to take back one’s own self. But this is afetishized self, a consumable self, totally bound to its dreams, its feelings, its emotions,its body, against the backdrop of a mass narcissism relayed by digital technology. Thisfigure of the self is a decisive cog in the project for the infinite expansion of themarket, in this era dominated by the reflex of quantity–one in which selling imagesby way of images seems to have become the ultimate meaning of life.

The second logic is marked by a deep desire for partition, separation and secession.The propensity toward endogamy is a powerful characteristic of our era. Many nolonger want to live outside their own bubbles and echo chambers, among themselves,with those like them. The practices of excommunication and quarantine have made acomeback. This is plain to see, and hear, in the carceral landscape that wefind increas-ingly pock-marks the planet: territorial segmentation and fragmentation, camps, enclaves–all mechanisms designed to separate people and cut the ties between them.

By that, I do not mean to imply any symmetry between the‘identities’held up as abanner by the radicalized right, and those in which minorities wrap themselves (sometimesfor want of anything else to defend). But I fear that in such a context no politics based onidentity can have a sufficient coefficient of universality such as would allow us to create thenecessary coalitions to stand together in effectively meeting the great planetary challenges.

**J.C.: How far is this desire for secession–which is not exactly the same thing as adesire for domination–transforming the way we think about contemporary politics?**

**A.M**: ew mechanisms of domination are constantly emerging. Most are abstract anddematerialized–this, even if matter, bodies and nerves are still their main targets. Pre-dation, draining and extraction remain the rule, as does the recourse to brute force. Butthe new domination also operates implicitly, through the proliferation of means of sur-veillance, the use of technological ingenuity, the practices that set each of us in compe-tition with everyone else, and the revision of laws in order to extend capital’s reach.Today, domination proceeds through all these avenues, and even more so through thedraining of the critical faculties, the drying up of the imaginaries that would be necessaryfor refounding a project for life, and living at the planetary scale. That is what is currentlyunderway, and what I call brutalism. It’s not spontaneous–it’s planned and calculated.

Faced with all this, many continue to resist. But Ifind two responses in particular arestriking. Thefirst is the reflex toflee. In some parts of the world,flight is coming to looklike a real mass movement. Mass migrations and desertions are potential weapons. Theworld’s powerful have well understood this and are trying to combat these phenomena ofdefection by ramping up the number of camps and an unequal distribution of the abilityto move and travel.
