view, even if violence has not been entirely eradicated, it has been domesticated and sub-limated. We should also mention a third family of considerations which underline thatthis‘civilizing’process was possible only because the potential for violence internal toEuropean societies was turned outward to other places, like the colonies.

My intention is not to repeat any of these three currents of analysis. Rather, it is tograsp an unprecedented moment of our present which is marked, above all, by a techno-logical acceleration without precedent in human history. This acceleration does not onlybring an implosion of our conceptions of time. It implicitly outlines the advent of a newregime of historicity, which I call‘chronophagic’, because it devours time in general andin particular the future, at the same time as it builds up a systematic amnesia. Time assuch is replaced byflux and noise.

These technologies have also pushed back the frontiers of speed, making it a comp-lement to power and a key resource in struggles for sovereignty. Moreover, in thisnew regime of historicity there is no longer anything human that is not also consumable,that is to say, which escapes the realm of calculation. Even more so, there is no longeranything human that does not have a digital double. Capital now seeks to extend itsgrip not only to the bottom of the ocean or to the stars, but also to atoms, cells andneurons.

**J.C.: In what sense does Africa, as what you call a‘reserve of strength [puissance] andstrength in reserve’constitute, if not the panacea, at least a space of possibilities forthe future of humanity, which today seems so fragile?**

**A.M**: Firstly, on account of its physique, its monumentality, which continues to fascinateme. It is a gigantic continent, and it’d be hard to convince me that this extensiveness, thisgigantism, the fact that it occupies such an eminent place in the planetary mass, all meansnothing. Even if I don’t know what this extensiveness really means, Ifind it intriguing. 

Speaking of its physique, I would also like to refer to what Africa contains, or holds instore–by which of course I mean humans. Their numbers will keep on growing at leasttill the end of this century, and it is doubtless here that the most phenomenal changes willtake place. Living humanity, in its multiplicity and in its most multicoloured character,will have one of its vastest abodes in Africa. To speak of what Africa contains is not,however, only to speak of the different species populating its surface, but also to thinkof its rivers, forests, mountains, sun, savannahs, of deserts which are not at all desertedand everything wefind in its subsoil and at the bottom of the oceans surrounding it: rareminerals, precious stones...

There is also, most importantly, a vast reserve of elements, many of which remainunknown–forces critical for the future history of life on Earth in the Anthropoceneera. The colossal character of what we don’t yet know on this continent, of that whichstill escapes calculation and appropriation, is the second important factor which leadsme to think that Africa represents strength-in-reserve for the entire Earth

Recently I was in Kinshasa and before I set offagain I spent two hours watching theriver Congoflow past. Impressive were the sheer volume of water and its power–wedon’t know how long they have existed and how long they will last. But as I contemplatedthe river, it was difficult for me not to feel, in my ownflesh, the turbulent stirring ofuntamed forces and energy–ones which perhaps can’t even be tamed. For me, Africa
