# I. Samkhya as Enumeration

Because the term '  iSamkhya" means "enumeration" or "relating to  number," one reasonable point of departure for presenting the Sam- khya philosophical system as a "complete system of human communi- cation" is to outline the more prominent sets of enumerations.

(A) Enumerations relating to the basic principles (tattvas)

The set of 25. First and foremost, of course, is the set of 25 that
encompasses the basic principles of the system, namely:

1. pure consciousness (purusa)
2. primordial materiality (mulaprakrti)
3. intellect (buddhi or mahat)
4. egoity (ahamkara)
5. mind (manas)—both a sense capacity and an action capacity

6. hearing (Srotra) -----\
7. touching (tvac)  -------\
8. seeing (caksus)  --------->  the five sense capacities
9. tasting (rasana) -------/        (buddhindriyas)
10. smelling (ghrana)----/

11. speaking (vac) ----------\
12. grasping/prehending (pani)\
13. walking/motion (pada) -----> the five action capacities
14. excreting (payu) ---------/      (karmendriyas)
15. procreating (upastha)----/

16. sound (sabda)   -----\
17. contact (sparsa)---------\
18. form (rupa)     -----------> the five subtle elements
19. taste (rasa)    ---------/      (tanmatras)
20. smell (gandha)  -----/

21. "space"/ether (akasa)-\
22. wind/air (vayu) ----------\
23. fire (tejas)    -----------> the five gross elements
24. water (ap)      ----------/      (mahabhutas)
25. earth (prthivi) ------/

According to Samkhya philosophy, among these twenty-five princi- ples, only the first two are independent existents, namely, pure con- sciousness (purusa) and primordial materiality (mulaprakrti). Inother  words, only items (1) and (2) exist in some sense as "distinct" or "separate" from one another. The two are described in Samkhya philosophy as being ungenerated, outside of ordinary space and time, stable, simple, unsupported, nonmergent (or nondissolvable), without parts, and independent (SK IO).9 The relation between them is one  of simple copresence (SK 19). Pure consciousness is inherently inac- tive, but primordial materiality is inherently generative in the sense  that it is capable of generating a set of discrete or manifest subdivisions when activated by the catalytic presence of pure consciousness. Items  (3) through (25) make up the various subdivisions of primordial mate- riality and are, thus, internal to primordial materiality or represent
