"parts" of a totally functioning "whole," which is primordial materia- lity. These twenty-three subdivisions are described as being generated,  temporal, spatial, unstable, composite, supported, mergent (or dissolv- able), made up of parts, and contingent (SK 10). Seven of the sub- divisions of primordial materiality, namely, intellect, egoity, and the  five subtle elements are described as being both generated, that is to say, emergents from primordial materiality, and generative, that is to say, capable of generating subsequent subdivisions. The remaining sixteen subdivisions, namely, the mind, the five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five gross elements are only generated, that is to say, incapable of generating additional subdivisions. Intellect is generated out of primordial materiality but also generates egoity. Egoity is generated out of intellect but also generates the mind, the five sense capacities, the five action capacities, and the five subtle elements. The five subtle elements are generated out of egoity but also generate the five gross elements. Subtle elements are so called because they are the generic (avisesa) material essences for all specific (visesa) elements. They are imperceptible to ordinary persons, whereas gross elements can be perceived by ordinary persons.

The subtle elements are the generic presuppositions for the experi- ence of all specific objectivity. Plve kinds of specific sensations may be  experienced, namely, specific vibrations via the ear (speaking, music, sounds, and so forth), specific contacts via the skin (hot, cold, and so forth), specific forms via the eyes (colors, shapes), specific tastes via the tongue (bitter, sweet), and specific smells via the nose. According to Samkhya, the apprehension of a specific vibration is only possible if  there is an undifferentiated generic receptivity for sound, or put differ- ently, if the experiencer is in some sense actually constituted by the  generic, material essence of sound, that is, actually made up of a subtle sound element. The subtle sound element itself is not any particular sound. It is the generic essence of sound, the presupposition for all  particular sounds, the universal possibility of sound-as-such. Simi- larly, the apprehension of a specific contact is only possible if there is  an undifferentiated generic receptivity for touch, the universal possi- bility of touch-as-such, namely, the subtle touch element, and so forth.  The subtle elements, therefore, are not functions or capacities (as are, for example, the five senses or the motor capacities of an organism) nor are they the actual sense organs (eye, ear, and so forth) which, of course, are aggregates of gross elements. They are, rather, subtle, material essences or presuppositions with which perceptual and motor  functioning correlate and through which certain aspects of the mate- rial world become differentiated. If such subtle, material essences or  presuppositions were not present, no specific objects could possibly be experienced or become manifest, and in this sense the subtle elements correlate with and may be said to "generate" the gross elements. In
