the absence of subtle elements, in other words, there would only be an unmanifest mass of primordial materiality. Some have suggested that the subtle elements might be usefully compared to Platonic ideas or universals, but it must be kept in mind that for Samkhya all such ideas or universals have some sort of subtle, material basis (requiring, in other words, a reconceptualization of idealism in terms of reductive materialism, as will be discussed further in the sequel).10

Regarding the manner in which gross elements are derived from subtle elements, the important Samkhya texts differ, suggesting that the manner of derivation was an open issue even in the classical period. The Karika itself simply asserts that the five gross elements are derived from the five subtle elements (SK 22 and 28). Some commentaries {The Tattvakaumudi, Mdtharavrtli, Jayamangala, and so forth) argue for a so-called "accumulation theory" of derivation, according to which each successive subtle element combines with the preceding ones in  order to generate a gross element.11 The subtle sound element gene- rates the space/ether gross element (akasa); the subtle touch element  and the subtle sound element generate the gross air/wind element  (vayu); the subtle form element with the subtle sound and touch ele- ments generate the gross fire element (tejas); the subtle taste element  with subtle sound, touch, and form elements generate the gross water element (ap); and the subtle smell element with the subtle sound, touch, form, and taste elements generate the gross earth element (prthivi). According to the Tuktidipika (Pandeya edition, p. 91 and pp. 117-118, and hereafter all page references are to the Pandeya edition), this "accumulation theory" is attributed to Varsaganya. The commentary of Gaudapada argues, however, that each subtle element is capable of generating each gross element singly. The Chinese commentary on the Karika offers yet another interpretation.12 According to it, each subtle element generates not only a respective gross element but a respective sense capacity as well. Thus, the subtle sound element generates not only akasa but also the sense capacity of hearing (srotra), and so forth. Although an attractive idea, it tends to confuse the actual physical sense organ with an actual sense capacity. This may well be an old notion, but it is hard to imagine that the final philosophical  system would have settled for such a view. Still other East Asian com- mentaries offer further interpretations, according to one of which the  five subtle elements generate not only gross elements (in an accumu- lation manner) but the entire set of eleven sense and action capacities  as well.13 For Isvarakrsna and the classical tradition, however, it is clear enough that the five subtle elements are only generative of the five gross elements (and not the various sense and action capacities), although the manner of derivation was evidently a continuing matter of debate. All specific objects (visaya) in the phenomenal empirical world of ordinary experience are collocations or aggregations of the various
