gross elements and are never themselves numbered as basic principles. 

Given these various distinctions regarding their derivation, the initial listing of 25 principles may now be more precisely exhibited in a chart.

**Larson gives an exhausting table that I will respin**

(1, Consciousness) &compfn; (2, Primodiral materiality) &rarr; (3, intellect)

(3, intellect) &rarr; (4, egoity)


(4, egoity) &rarr; The elevenfold capacities: sensing: motor functioning, and mind

(4, egoity) &rarr; The five subtle elements

The five subtle elements &rarr; The five gross elements

where The elevenfold capacities are:

5. mind

6. hearing

7. touching

8. seeing

9. tasting

10. smelling

11. speaking

12. grasping

13. walking

14. excreting

15. procreating

where The five subtle elements are:

16. sound

17. touch

18. form

19. taste

20. smell

where the five gross elements are:

21. space

22. wind

23. fire

24. water

25. earth

Principles (5) through (15), and (21) through (25) are generated products (vikara, SK 3).14 Principles (3), (4), and (16) through  (20) are both generative and generated (prakrti-vikrti, SK 3). Princi- ple (2) is generative but ungenerated (avikfti), and (1) is neither gene- rative nor generated (na prakrtir na vikrtih purufah, SK 3).

The set of 3. Principles (3), (4), and (5), namely, intellect, egoity,  and mind, taken together are referred to as the "internal organ" (antah- karana, SK 33), and their three respective functions are "reflective  discerning" (adhyavasaya), "self-awareness" (abhimatia), and "inten- tionality" [samkalpaka). Together they perform the task of intellec- tual awareness, which functions not only in immediate experience but  encompasses the past and future as well (SK 33).

The set of 10. Items (6) through (10), and (11) through (15), namely, the five sense capacities and the five motor functions, taken together are referred to as the "external organ" (bdhyakarana, SK 33), and their respective activities provide mere sensings (alocanamatra, SK 28), namely, hearing, touching, and so forth; and basic motor  skills, namely, speaking, grasping, and so forth (SK 28). These ope- rate only in immediate or present experience (SK 33).

The set of 13. Items (3) through (15), namely, intellect, egoity, mind, the five sense capacities, and the five motor functions, taken  together are referred to as the "thirteenfold instrument" (trayodasa- karana, SK32), or what is often called simply the "essential core"  (linga, SK 40), which is the presupposition for all experience. The
