# Gershom Schlem: Kabbalah and Counter-History

## David Biale

## IBSN: 0-674-36330-2

While still a student in Germany in  1917, Gershom Scholem, then  twenty, met Gustav Steinschneider, the grandson of the great nineteenth-century Jewish bibliographer, Moritz Steinschneider. Scholem relates in a later reminiscence that he was struck by the remarkable contrast between the young Steinschneider, torn between Communism and Zionism, and his famous grandfather.’ The elder Steinschneider, one of the pillars of the rationalist school of Jewish historiography, generally called the Wissenschaft des Judentums, allegedly said that Jewish scholarship had “only one task left: to give the remains of Judaism a decent burial.”2 Scholem must have considered the younger Steinschneider’s oscillation between Jewish nationalism and revolutionary cosmopolitanism as both proof and refutation of his grandfather's pessimism. On the one hand, the assimilation of German Jewry had gone so far by the Weimar period that the young Steinschneider, along with most of his generation, had virtually no conception of the heritage of historical Judaism. In calling Moritz Steinschneider “the most central figure in the group of learned liquidators of Judaism,”? Scholem clearly lays part of the blame for this sorry state of affairs at the doorstep of the grandfather's generation. Alienated from traditional Judaism, but equally alienated from the liberal bourgeois politics and culture of the older generation, many young Jews turned to revolutionary Communism as a new source of identity. On the other hand, the very existence of a Jewish alternative to assimilation or revolution—Zionism—must have seemed to Scholem proof that Judaism remained very much alive
Scholem’s sketch of the contrast between the two generations of Steinschneiders suggests in capsule form the theme of this study: Scholem’s own rejection of German-Jewish life through his radical revision of nineteenth-century German-Jewish historiography, represented here by Moritz Steinschneider. Against the predominantly
rationalist bias of the nineteenth century, he created almost single-  '|| handedly the academic study of Jewish mysticism. The virtual  monopoly that Scholem and his disciples have achieved in interpreting Jewish mysticism itself demands a study of Scholem’s work

Scholem’s remarkably lucid and accessible writings have succeeded in reaching an audience far wider.than the narrow circle of Judaica scholars. The great interest of recent years in the Kabbalah is due almost exclusively to Scholem’s growing popularity as an historian of religion and an authoritative spokesman for Judaism. Diverse intellectuals from the writer Jorge Luis Borges to the literary critic Harold Bloom have taken to‘quoting the Kabbalah as interpreted through Scholem‘s eyes. How has he succeeded in making such an ostensibly alien and obscure subject so compelling and relevant to secular Jews and non-Jews alike? Since scholars and nonscholars will be forced for many years to read the Kabbalah through Scholem’s interpretations, it is imperative to reconstruct the assumptions and influences that lie behind his historiography.

A study of Scholem cannot be limited, however, to his activitiesin the Kabbalistic archives. His revolt against the Wissenschaft des Judentums was part of a larger revolt against German-Jewish life. Already a radical Zionist before World War and immigrating to Palestine in 1923, Scholem rejected on a political and cultural level the German-Jewish world that had produced the Wissenschaft des Judentums. Moreover, in returning to Judaism from a secular background but without adopting orthodoxy, Scholem developed a theological response of his own to the rational theology of the nineteenth century. Through the prism of his historiography, we can discern Scholem’s positions on the political, cultural, and theological issues that confronted his generation.

Scholem not only too up cudgels against the ninetheenth-century rationalists, but also frequently came into conflict with the dominantopinons of his own time. He developed many of his ideas in lifelong controversy with Martin Buber, perhaps the most outstanding Jewish thinker of the last generation of German Jewry. Although many of his initial assumptions about the irrationalist nature of Judiasm were similar to Buber's, Scholem parted ways with the great religious philospher during World War I and charted his own course.

Scholem has defined himself as a “religious anarchist.” Although the precise meaning of the term must emerge from the vari ous contexts of Scholem’s work, we may begin with a preliminary definition of anarchism as a philosophy that recognizes no sing  source of authority. Scholem’s anarchism must be distinguishe  from nihilism, which rejects all sources of authority, and from
liberal pluralism, which claims that all sources of authority are equally valid. I shall try to show that Scholem took an anarchistic position on the issues he confronted and that this position can help to organize his views into a coherent and original philosophy of Jewish history.

Behind Scholem’s anarchistic thought lies a powerful and extraordinary personality. Rebellious and individualistic by nature, there is something of the “demonic” anarchist in Scholem’s character. As interesting as it would be to explore in depth the man behind the historiography, this study has the more modest goal of simply  trying to understand what Scholem has said and how it fits into an intellectual tradition. Where necessary, I have referred to matters: of personal and intellectual biography, but only as it helps to illuminate Scholem’s thought. In part, this avoidance of biography stems from a conclusion I have come to concerning Scholem’s intellectual development. He arrived at certain definite positions on political, cultural, and historiographical questions at a very early age—on some issues even before the age of twenty. With a few exceptions, he did not significantly alter views throughout his career. This striking constancy of intellectual position is surely what made Scholem such a formidable figure in the eyes of his contemporaries during his youth, since he was already dead certain about many questions which they still debated. On the other hand, there is no evidence that Scholem’s adherence to certain positions ever petrified into dogma. He has had the remarkable capacity to continue developing and elaborating his ideas in new and subtle ways without significantly changing their substance. His personal anarchism has perhaps prevented him from becoming stodgy or stale. Again, I have no “deep-structure” explanation for this phenomenon, nor do | attempt one in this study
Scholem’s anarchistic philosophy of Jewish history is a highly individualistic response to the crises of his time. He offers us no concrete “program,” since his philosophy is the personal solution of a unique academic historian. By studying such a nonconformist figure, we do not necessarily gain direct knowledge of the general character of Scholem’s generation, for he was often as much at odds with his contemporaries as with his elders. It is perhaps only today, when the programmatic philosophies of German-Jewish intellectuals have vanished in the smoke and ashes of the Nazi holocaust, that we can evaluate Scholem’s lifework not only as an achievement in Jewis istoriography, but also as a lasting contribution to modern Jewish thought. Although perhaps idiosyncratic, Scholem’s philosophy may ‘ITuminate indirectly the political and  cultural options open to the last generation of German Jews.
Scholem’s relation to the Jewish historiographical tradition is not only central to his enterprise as an historian, but is also symptomatic of his whole intellectual makeup. Scholem acquired many of the tools of his scholarly trade by himself; an autodidact since childhood, he must be regarded as a thinker sui generis. Although he developed many of his central ideas on his own, he often did so in polemical struggle with his predecessors and contemporaries. | shall attempt to point out where I feel that Scholem has deliberately borrowed from other thinkers, but also where his ideas may be the unconscious product of an intellectual climate of opinion. No person is ever entirely aware of the ideas he has absorbed from his environment, even as he creatively appropriates and transforms them for his own purposes.

The historiographical tradition with which we most often find Scholem in conflict is the Wissenschaft des Judentums. Athough all secular study of Jewish history to the present day may be called Wissenschaft des Judentums, | shall use the term in a more specific sense to refer to those nineteenth-century scholars, particularly in Germany, who created modern Jewish historiography. By use of the definite article 1 mean to suggest that the nineteenth-century historians can be regarded as a school. In treating them as such, | am aware of the many qualifications and exceptions that might bring such a claim to grief, but I believe that Scholem himself relates to the Wissenschaft des Judentums in this way. In fact, Scho-  lem generally refers to the nineteenth-century historiography as the Wissenschaft vom Judentum, indicating by this less common variant that he has in mind a school with a particular point of view rather than, generically, all of modern Jewish Studies. Since this is a book about Scholem and not modern Jewish historiography as a whole, J shall consciously adopt some of the points of view of my subject where this may serve to reconstruct his position.

Scholem’s polemical relationship to the Wissenschaft des Judentums goes back to the early stages of his intellectual development. As early as 1920, as a student about to begin his work in Jewish  ‘mysticism, Scholem planned to write an essay on “the suicide of Judaism in the so-called Wissenschaft vom Judentum.’® Postponed for a quarter of a century, the essay was written in highly passionate Hebrew in 1945 under the title “From Reflections on the Science of Judaism. . Subtitled “A Jubilee Lecture That Was Never Deliv2 ah sgira intended his remarks to reflect as much on the contribution of the Institute of Jewish Studies at the Hebrew Univer-
sity, which had just celebrated its twentieth anniversary, as on the Wissenschaft des Judentums itself. The question underlying his presentation was whether the new nationalist historiography had indeed corrected the errors of the nineteenth century

Throughout the essay, Scholem adopts a highly polemical and even satirical tone toward the Wissenschaft des Judentums, which has led many to consider it his declaration of war against his predecessors. To a certain extent, the essay is now considered to have de- | picted the Wissenschaft des Judentums in an unfairly negative light and to have simplified an historiographical movement that contained many different tendencies.” Without disputing that the piece reflects Scholem’s perception of the Wissenschaft des Judentums and does not even pretend to be a balanced historical account, I believe that a careful analysis of its “hidden message” reveals that his attitude toward his predecessors is much more ambiguous and positive than is generally believed. By a close examination of the essay, we will find a remarkable example of Scholem’s dialectical philosophy of history at work.

Scholem believes that the Wissenschaft des Judentums failed because it was torn apart by three interrelated contradictions: objectivity versus apologetics, romanticism versus rationalism, and constructive versus destructive criticism. The nineteenth-century scholars professed the goal of historical objectivity, but because of the equally pressing political needs of emancipation, they used their historiography just as their homiletics for apologetic purposes. Apologetics demanded that Judaism be portrayed as a familiar rather than a foreign belief. Scholem refers to one particularly outrageous example of such apologetics: a sermon published by a nineteenth-century Jewish preacher entitled “Our Patriarch Jacob—the Model of a City Councilman” (Unser Erzvater Jakob das Vorbild eines Stadtverordneten). He comments contemptuously: “the prince of the nation in the guise of a petty bourgeois.’ Here is a theme to which we will return: for Scholem, there is something fundamentally antithetical between true Judaism and “bourgeois culture.” The overweening desire of partially acculturated Jews to enter the bourgeoisie motivated an apologetic stance that sapped Judaism of any authenticity.

Apologetics in the service of emancipation led to the second contradiction, between romanticism and rationalism. The early nineteenth century was an age of romantic nationalist historiography. But particularly in Germany, this romanticism often became antisemitic in its emphasis on a reconstituted German nation. The Jewish historians, though professing romantic ideals of using the
past  to inspire pride in Jewish identity, hitched their star to enlightenment rationalism. Concerned to enter the intellectual ‘salon’ of nineteenth-century Europe and aware that it would only be open to them if based on universalist, rationalist principles, the Jewish intellectuals emphasized the rationalist aspects of Judaism and scrupulously avoided what went on in the cellar.’ Irrationalism or mysticism was swept under the rug, as were the revolutionary or apocalyptic tendencies in Jewish messianism. Social history was all but ignored in the desire to portray Judaism as an intellectual religion. The Wissenschaft des Judentums wrote Geistesgeschichte in which the Geist was predominantly rational.

Frequently steeped in rationalist ideas of progress, many nineteenth-century historians believed that Judaism's rational side was reaching fulfillment in modern times. Historiography’s purpose was to contribute to this elevated goal by purging Jewish history of all vestigial irrationalism: The Wissenschaft des Judentums wanted

> to remove the irrational stinger and banish the demonic enthusiasm from Jewish history through exaggerated theologizing and spiritualizing. This was actually the decisive original sin. This terrifying giant, our history, is called to task. . . and this enormous creature, full of destructive power, made up of vitality, evil and perfection, must contract itself, stunt its growth and declare that it has no substance. The demonic giant is nothing but a simple fool who fulfills the duties of a solid citizen and every decent Jewish bourgeois could unashamedly bid him good-day in the streets of the city, the immaculate city of the 19th century.”

This passage reads almost like a Nietzschean manifesto or a statement of Bergsonian vitalism from the turn of the century. Indeed, critics have attacked Scholem for extolling the “Dionysian” in Jewish history against the “Apollonian” spirit of the nineteenth century. We shall see that Scholem’s position is considerably more complicated than one might assume from this passage, for he uses the word “demonic” in a much more positive sense than the English suggests. Like Goethe's interpretation of the word déamonisch,” Scholem conceives of demonic irrationalism as a creative force: destruction is necessary for future construction. As opposed to the harmonious idea of progress adopted by the nineteenth-century historians, Scholem’s vision of Jewish history is a stormy dialectic of constructive and destructive forces, We shall examine in particular Scholem’s argument that the demonic Sabbatians of the seventeenth century prepared the ground for less destructive movements in the eighteenth, such as Hasidism and Enlightenment.
By suppressing the “irrational,” the representatives of the Wissenschaft des Judentums considered Judaism moribund since they ignored precisely those elements that gave it vitality. This rationalist bias led them to their undialectical view of Jewish history and precluded the possibility of future life: The Wissenschaft des Judentums “became the mouthpiece of the [Jewish] bourgeoisie for whom the slogans of destruction and construction are equally infuriating because they want to go to sleep. This sleep is known as gradual progress, preservation of the status quo through reform.”” For Scholem, the Zionist revolutionary, the complacent reformism of bourgeois German Jewry held no promise for the future, and the fatal affection for the status quo infected the historiography of the period.

The nineteenth century's rationalism led directly, according to Scholem, to a tendency to “spiritualize” Judaism and freeze it in rigid theological dogma.” The sin of the Wissenschaft des Judentums was not just one-sided rationalism, but dogmatic rationalism. Judaism was defined by one and only one theological principle, although its formulation might vary from thinker to thinker. Scholem argues that this dogmatism reveals a fundamental misunderstanding of the history of Jewish theology. His own position does not culminate in a monolithic theology, but in an account of contradictory formulas. He maintains that Jewish theology, encompassing both rationalism and demonic irrationalism, is anarchistic:  it "yields no one authoritative formula or dogma. The very vitality of the Jewish tradition lies in this anarchism, since dogma, in Scholem’s view, is by definition lifeless. Scholem engages the nineteenth century precisely on its own territory of Geistesgeschichte and radically revises its conception of the nature of the Jewish Geist.

The final contradiction in which the Wissenschaft des Judentums became entangled was between the destructive and constructive poles of the secular historical method: ‘The conservative and destructive tendencies in [historical] science are bound up with one another. Historical criticism as a scientific method cannot escape this essential dialectic.” Historiography, like Jewish history itself, must involve a dialectic between romantic affirmation and demonic destruction. For Scholem, historical reasoning by nature is destructive, but out of the eradication of the moribund aspects of a tradition, historical criticism can “elevate the vestiges of the past to symbols of [new] life.” The Wissenschaft des Judentums lost this dialectical tension, however, and because it perceived its subject as moribund, it did not use historical criticism to rescue elements of the past for building a vital future. Instead, it regarded all of the
past as equally irrelevant to the present, thus laying the basis for a positivistic, antiquarian method: the burial of the historical Corpse beneath mounds of indiscriminate facts. The final consequence of apologetics and dogmatic rationalism was the study of the Past for its own sake, divorced from the present: a “terrifying rite of burial.”’"4

Scholem does not lay the blame for the mistaken rationalist interpretation of Judaism solely on the Wissenschaft des Judentums. As the “academic mortician” of Judaism, nineteenth-century scholarship was more a symptom than a cause of the general rigor mortis of nineteenth-century Judaism. Scholem implies that historjography was necessarily doomed to failure in nineteenth-century Europe.'> The conflict between Jewish romanticism and the desire for emancipation and assimilation was characteristic of all German Jewish life. Because the European nations were not prepared to assimilate the Jews without demanding that they alter their identity beyond recognition, Jewish historiography had no choice but apologetics. Scholem’s criticism of the Wissenschaft des Judentums must be read as a Zionist critique of the possibility of a healthy Jewish life in Europe as a whole: although the Wissenschaft des Judentums started its career in the beginning of the nineteenth century with some laudable romantic goals, the social context prevented it from surviving the three contradictions mentioned above. For Scholem, the failure of Jewish historiography in the nineteenth century was only one aspect of the general crisis of Jewish bourgeois liberalism.

Scholem believes that Zionism has made possible a fundamental revision of the perspectives of Jewish historiography.16 No longer must historiography serve as a handmaiden to political apologetics or theological dogmatism. Jewish history can be considered “from within.” For Scholem, objective historiography is guaranteed by Zionism because Zionism is by definition antidogmatic: it stands above all particular interpretations of Judaism and is the one common denominator that unites all Jews. We will examine in the final chapter whether this claim of objectivity holds up in Scholem’s own historiography.

Scholem notes that some of the nineteenth-century writers were close to the nationalist position he advocates. He mentions specifically Heinrich Graetz and Nachman Krochmal, but points out that they were either remarkable exceptions or ignored altogether.” Even Graetz and Krochmal failed to treat the Kabbalah satisfactorily from Scholem’s point of view, although their “failures” would provide him with some fruitful sources. Against the theological historians of his day, Graetz Proposed a definition of Judaism as the
sum total of all its historical manifestations. Whereas Graetz failed to accomplish this kind of pluralistic historiography in Europe because of the hostile demands of the age, Scholem maintains that he can fulfill Graetz’s program in the land of Israel. He accepts Graetz’s historicist definition of the “essence” of Judaism, but rejects the possibility of realizing it without a Jewish national homeland. He implicitly claims to complete Graetz’s program by giving equal weight to the irrationalist factors in Jewish history which Graetz was compelled to ignore or denigrate.

With other radical Zionists, Scholem argues that historiography, no less than any other sphere of Jewish life, needs national “normalization” in order to flourish. He explicitly rejects Chaim Nachman Bialik’s belief that the Wissenschaft des Judentums could have succeeded had its language been Hebrew.18 Language in and of itself could not effect the revolutionary change necessary for a new historiography: Zionism had to take the correct impulses in the Wissenschaft des Judentums and quite literally transplant them to the new soil of Israel.

Despite Scholem’s belief in the importance of Zionism as the basis for a new historiography, he never understood national “nor-  malization” to mean chauvinistic nationalism. As a youth in Germany during World War I, he became inalterably opposed to the degeneration of modern nationalism and developed great sympathy for political anarchism. His Zionism was always a revolt against the authoritarian and jingoistic tendencies in nationalism to which Zionism was also prey: the Jews must not be “like all the other nations.”

His essay on the Wissenschaft des Judentums was directed as much against his nationalist colleagues at the Hebrew University as against the nineteenth century. If the Wissenschaft des Judentums had degenerated into pure antiquarian negation, the new nationalist historians often went to the opposite extreme: uncritical glorification. Desiring to restore pride in Jewish history, they frequently reverted to the pious affirmations of the orthodox, but in a nationalist idiom:

> We came to rebel but we ended up continuing [in the same path]... All these plagues have now disguised themselves in nationalism. From the frying pan into the fire: after the emptiness of assimilation comes another, that of nationalist excess. We have cultivated nationalist “sermons” and “rhetoric” (melitza) in science to take the place of religious sermons and rhetoric. In both cases, the real forces operating in our world, the genuine demonic remains outside the picture we have created."
By committing an error diametrically opposite to that of the Wissenschaft des Judentums, the nationalists had fallen into the same dogmatic trap.

To borrow from Nietzsche's terminology in his Use and Abuse of History, Scholem renounces both ‘‘antiquarian” and “monumentalist’” historiography, calling instead for a “critical” historiography which would combine romantic, nationalist ideals with critical method. The Wissenschaft des Judentums started out with such a balance, but because of the contradictions imposed on it by its historical context, its critical side went out of control and became pure negation and antiquarianism. Some of the nationalists, Scholem suggests, have gone to the other extreme of pure affirmation and have also lost the critical method.

a Zionist historiography with a critical method. If the Wissenschaft des Judentums wanted to liquidate the Jewish tradition, Scholem promises a “liquidation of the liquidation” (hisul ha-hisul).’° His formulation is just close enough to Hegel’s ‘negation of the negation” to suggest to his audience his dialectical relation to his predecessors. His is not a simple negation of the past but a dialectical appropriation of it: “We wanted to return to science with all its rigor and without compromise as we found it in the writings of Zunz and Steinschneider, but we wanted to direct it towards construction and affirmation.’”! The Wissenschaft des Judentums, although enmeshed in paralyzing contradictions, nonetheless developed the secular historical method that Scholem advocates: “[Their] program would have been appropriate had it been directed towards the building of the Jewish nation.””

tums emerges unexpectedly from the very language he uses ostensibly to criticize them: “The optimism famous in their opinions is a lie and a mask—there is something of the sitra ahra, from the other side entirely, which emerges from their actions . . . | must confess that the figures of Zunz and Steinschneider have attracted me [for a long time] . . . they are truly demonic figures.””’ By calling Zunz  and Steinschneider, whom he takes as representatives of the most  ee  destructive side of the Wi haft d d demonic, : ve he Wissenschaft des Judentums, ‘de  Scholem implies that the rationalists’ negative relation to the Jewish tradition has a structural similarity to Sabbatian antinomianis™. Just as the Sabbatian heresy had a constructive side, so the emonic element in the Wissenschaft des Judentums—its critical historica method—must be the key to future constructive historiography.

Scholem's exploitation of his predecessors calls for the appropri-
ation of their critical method, but inversion of their rationalist priorities:

> Factors that have been emphasized and were considered positive from the world-view of assimilation and self-justification require (undamental new criticism in order to determine what their actual role was in the development of the nation. Factors which were denigrated will appear in a different, more positive light from this point of view . . . It is possible that what was termed degeneracy will be thought of as a revelation and light and what seemed to [the nineteenth-century historians] impotent hallucinations—will be revealed as a great living myth . . . not the washing and mummification of the dead, but the discovery of hidden life by removal of the obfuscating masks.”

Here in a nutshell is Scholem’s whole program: Where the Wissenschaft des Judentums saw only an historical corpse, Scholem finds “hidden life." He accepts the nineteenth-century estimation that if one considers only the rational aspect of the Jewish tradition, Judaism appears dead indeed. But by also considering “degeneracy” and “impotent hallucinations” as equally legitimate within Judaism, one discovers hidden life—a “great living myth,” which Scholem finds in Jewish Gnosticism and the Kabbalah.

The historian must search beneath the surface, in the “cellar’’ of Jewish history to find his living subject. Scholem applies this methodology to his study of the Wissenschaft des Judentums itself. He comments that “not everything takes place on the plane of the obvious. This Wissenschaft has a hidden history of its own.’25 The “obvious” is assimilationist negation. But this “demonic” destructive side is also a virtue since it lays the basis for critical historiography. The Wissenschaft des Judentums provides Scholem with the critical method necessary for overturning its own rationalist conclusions and discovering the “great living myth.”  

irtue” from the Wissenschaft des Judentums “counter-history.” I | mean by this term the belief that the true history lies in a subterra- | nean tradition that must be | brought to light, much as the apocalyp- | tic thinker decodes an ancient prophecy or as Walter Benjamin spoke of “brushing history against the grain.” Counter-history is a type of revisionist historiography, but where the revisionist proposes a new theory or finds new facts, the counter-historian transvalues old ones. He does not deny that his predecessors’ interpretation of history is correct, as does the revisionist, but he rejects the completeness of that interpretation: he affirms the existence of a
“mainstream” or “establishment” history, but believes that the vital force lies in a secret tradition.

“For Scholem, the Kabbalah, a suppressed and esoteric tradition, holds the key to the continuing vitality of Judaism. Where the nineteenth century saw mysticism and myth as roadblocks to the forward progress of Jewish | history, Scholem sees them as the motor  forces. There is a great similarity between Scholem’s views and the 7ounter-histories” of a number of writers at the turn of the century, particularly Martin Buber and M. Y. Berdichevsky, who who were influenced strongly by Nietzsche. Counter-history became a powerful tool of protest against both the normative orthodox tradition and the rationalist Judaism of the Enlightenment. However, Schora s counter-history is significantly different from those of the  ewish Nietzscheans” and he he developed his position partly in reit ion of them. As with his relationship to the Wissenschaft des Judentums, Scholem’s approach to the radical historiography of his own day represents a third course. His counter-history must be  seen as a dialectical negation of both rationalist hi storiography and  the nationalist response to it. 
