ation of their critical method, but inversion of their rationalist priorities:

> Factors that have been emphasized and were considered positive from the world-view of assimilation and self-justification require (undamental new criticism in order to determine what their actual role was in the development of the nation. Factors which were denigrated will appear in a different, more positive light from this point of view . . . It is possible that what was termed degeneracy will be thought of as a revelation and light and what seemed to [the nineteenth-century historians] impotent hallucinations—will be revealed as a great living myth . . . not the washing and mummification of the dead, but the discovery of hidden life by removal of the obfuscating masks.”

Here in a nutshell is Scholem’s whole program: Where the Wissenschaft des Judentums saw only an historical corpse, Scholem finds “hidden life." He accepts the nineteenth-century estimation that if one considers only the rational aspect of the Jewish tradition, Judaism appears dead indeed. But by also considering “degeneracy” and “impotent hallucinations” as equally legitimate within Judaism, one discovers hidden life—a “great living myth,” which Scholem finds in Jewish Gnosticism and the Kabbalah.

The historian must search beneath the surface, in the “cellar’’ of Jewish history to find his living subject. Scholem applies this methodology to his study of the Wissenschaft des Judentums itself. He comments that “not everything takes place on the plane of the obvious. This Wissenschaft has a hidden history of its own.’25 The “obvious” is assimilationist negation. But this “demonic” destructive side is also a virtue since it lays the basis for critical historiography. The Wissenschaft des Judentums provides Scholem with the critical method necessary for overturning its own rationalist conclusions and discovering the “great living myth.”  

irtue” from the Wissenschaft des Judentums “counter-history.” I | mean by this term the belief that the true history lies in a subterra- | nean tradition that must be | brought to light, much as the apocalyp- | tic thinker decodes an ancient prophecy or as Walter Benjamin spoke of “brushing history against the grain.” Counter-history is a type of revisionist historiography, but where the revisionist proposes a new theory or finds new facts, the counter-historian transvalues old ones. He does not deny that his predecessors’ interpretation of history is correct, as does the revisionist, but he rejects the completeness of that interpretation: he affirms the existence of a
