rationalist bias of the nineteenth century, he created almost single-  '|| handedly the academic study of Jewish mysticism. The virtual  monopoly that Scholem and his disciples have achieved in interpreting Jewish mysticism itself demands a study of Scholem’s work

Scholem’s remarkably lucid and accessible writings have succeeded in reaching an audience far wider.than the narrow circle of Judaica scholars. The great interest of recent years in the Kabbalah is due almost exclusively to Scholem’s growing popularity as an historian of religion and an authoritative spokesman for Judaism. Diverse intellectuals from the writer Jorge Luis Borges to the literary critic Harold Bloom have taken to‘quoting the Kabbalah as interpreted through Scholem‘s eyes. How has he succeeded in making such an ostensibly alien and obscure subject so compelling and relevant to secular Jews and non-Jews alike? Since scholars and nonscholars will be forced for many years to read the Kabbalah through Scholem’s interpretations, it is imperative to reconstruct the assumptions and influences that lie behind his historiography.

A study of Scholem cannot be limited, however, to his activitiesin the Kabbalistic archives. His revolt against the Wissenschaft des Judentums was part of a larger revolt against German-Jewish life. Already a radical Zionist before World War and immigrating to Palestine in 1923, Scholem rejected on a political and cultural level the German-Jewish world that had produced the Wissenschaft des Judentums. Moreover, in returning to Judaism from a secular background but without adopting orthodoxy, Scholem developed a theological response of his own to the rational theology of the nineteenth century. Through the prism of his historiography, we can discern Scholem’s positions on the political, cultural, and theological issues that confronted his generation.

Scholem not only too up cudgels against the ninetheenth-century rationalists, but also frequently came into conflict with the dominantopinons of his own time. He developed many of his ideas in lifelong controversy with Martin Buber, perhaps the most outstanding Jewish thinker of the last generation of German Jewry. Although many of his initial assumptions about the irrationalist nature of Judiasm were similar to Buber's, Scholem parted ways with the great religious philospher during World War I and charted his own course.

Scholem has defined himself as a “religious anarchist.” Although the precise meaning of the term must emerge from the vari ous contexts of Scholem’s work, we may begin with a preliminary definition of anarchism as a philosophy that recognizes no sing  source of authority. Scholem’s anarchism must be distinguishe  from nihilism, which rejects all sources of authority, and from
