liberal pluralism, which claims that all sources of authority are equally valid. I shall try to show that Scholem took an anarchistic position on the issues he confronted and that this position can help to organize his views into a coherent and original philosophy of Jewish history.

Behind Scholem’s anarchistic thought lies a powerful and extraordinary personality. Rebellious and individualistic by nature, there is something of the “demonic” anarchist in Scholem’s character. As interesting as it would be to explore in depth the man behind the historiography, this study has the more modest goal of simply  trying to understand what Scholem has said and how it fits into an intellectual tradition. Where necessary, I have referred to matters: of personal and intellectual biography, but only as it helps to illuminate Scholem’s thought. In part, this avoidance of biography stems from a conclusion I have come to concerning Scholem’s intellectual development. He arrived at certain definite positions on political, cultural, and historiographical questions at a very early age—on some issues even before the age of twenty. With a few exceptions, he did not significantly alter views throughout his career. This striking constancy of intellectual position is surely what made Scholem such a formidable figure in the eyes of his contemporaries during his youth, since he was already dead certain about many questions which they still debated. On the other hand, there is no evidence that Scholem’s adherence to certain positions ever petrified into dogma. He has had the remarkable capacity to continue developing and elaborating his ideas in new and subtle ways without significantly changing their substance. His personal anarchism has perhaps prevented him from becoming stodgy or stale. Again, I have no “deep-structure” explanation for this phenomenon, nor do | attempt one in this study
Scholem’s anarchistic philosophy of Jewish history is a highly individualistic response to the crises of his time. He offers us no concrete “program,” since his philosophy is the personal solution of a unique academic historian. By studying such a nonconformist figure, we do not necessarily gain direct knowledge of the general character of Scholem’s generation, for he was often as much at odds with his contemporaries as with his elders. It is perhaps only today, when the programmatic philosophies of German-Jewish intellectuals have vanished in the smoke and ashes of the Nazi holocaust, that we can evaluate Scholem’s lifework not only as an achievement in Jewis istoriography, but also as a lasting contribution to modern Jewish thought. Although perhaps idiosyncratic, Scholem’s philosophy may ‘ITuminate indirectly the political and  cultural options open to the last generation of German Jews.
