Scholem’s relation to the Jewish historiographical tradition is not only central to his enterprise as an historian, but is also symptomatic of his whole intellectual makeup. Scholem acquired many of the tools of his scholarly trade by himself; an autodidact since childhood, he must be regarded as a thinker sui generis. Although he developed many of his central ideas on his own, he often did so in polemical struggle with his predecessors and contemporaries. | shall attempt to point out where I feel that Scholem has deliberately borrowed from other thinkers, but also where his ideas may be the unconscious product of an intellectual climate of opinion. No person is ever entirely aware of the ideas he has absorbed from his environment, even as he creatively appropriates and transforms them for his own purposes.

The historiographical tradition with which we most often find Scholem in conflict is the Wissenschaft des Judentums. Athough all secular study of Jewish history to the present day may be called Wissenschaft des Judentums, | shall use the term in a more specific sense to refer to those nineteenth-century scholars, particularly in Germany, who created modern Jewish historiography. By use of the definite article 1 mean to suggest that the nineteenth-century historians can be regarded as a school. In treating them as such, | am aware of the many qualifications and exceptions that might bring such a claim to grief, but I believe that Scholem himself relates to the Wissenschaft des Judentums in this way. In fact, Scho-  lem generally refers to the nineteenth-century historiography as the Wissenschaft vom Judentum, indicating by this less common variant that he has in mind a school with a particular point of view rather than, generically, all of modern Jewish Studies. Since this is a book about Scholem and not modern Jewish historiography as a whole, J shall consciously adopt some of the points of view of my subject where this may serve to reconstruct his position.

Scholem’s polemical relationship to the Wissenschaft des Judentums goes back to the early stages of his intellectual development. As early as 1920, as a student about to begin his work in Jewish  ‘mysticism, Scholem planned to write an essay on “the suicide of Judaism in the so-called Wissenschaft vom Judentum.’® Postponed for a quarter of a century, the essay was written in highly passionate Hebrew in 1945 under the title “From Reflections on the Science of Judaism. . Subtitled “A Jubilee Lecture That Was Never Deliv2 ah sgira intended his remarks to reflect as much on the contribution of the Institute of Jewish Studies at the Hebrew Univer-
