sity, which had just celebrated its twentieth anniversary, as on the Wissenschaft des Judentums itself. The question underlying his presentation was whether the new nationalist historiography had indeed corrected the errors of the nineteenth century

Throughout the essay, Scholem adopts a highly polemical and even satirical tone toward the Wissenschaft des Judentums, which has led many to consider it his declaration of war against his predecessors. To a certain extent, the essay is now considered to have de- | picted the Wissenschaft des Judentums in an unfairly negative light and to have simplified an historiographical movement that contained many different tendencies.” Without disputing that the piece reflects Scholem’s perception of the Wissenschaft des Judentums and does not even pretend to be a balanced historical account, I believe that a careful analysis of its “hidden message” reveals that his attitude toward his predecessors is much more ambiguous and positive than is generally believed. By a close examination of the essay, we will find a remarkable example of Scholem’s dialectical philosophy of history at work.

Scholem believes that the Wissenschaft des Judentums failed because it was torn apart by three interrelated contradictions: objectivity versus apologetics, romanticism versus rationalism, and constructive versus destructive criticism. The nineteenth-century scholars professed the goal of historical objectivity, but because of the equally pressing political needs of emancipation, they used their historiography just as their homiletics for apologetic purposes. Apologetics demanded that Judaism be portrayed as a familiar rather than a foreign belief. Scholem refers to one particularly outrageous example of such apologetics: a sermon published by a nineteenth-century Jewish preacher entitled “Our Patriarch Jacob—the Model of a City Councilman” (Unser Erzvater Jakob das Vorbild eines Stadtverordneten). He comments contemptuously: “the prince of the nation in the guise of a petty bourgeois.’ Here is a theme to which we will return: for Scholem, there is something fundamentally antithetical between true Judaism and “bourgeois culture.” The overweening desire of partially acculturated Jews to enter the bourgeoisie motivated an apologetic stance that sapped Judaism of any authenticity.

Apologetics in the service of emancipation led to the second contradiction, between romanticism and rationalism. The early nineteenth century was an age of romantic nationalist historiography. But particularly in Germany, this romanticism often became antisemitic in its emphasis on a reconstituted German nation. The Jewish historians, though professing romantic ideals of using the
