past  to inspire pride in Jewish identity, hitched their star to enlightenment rationalism. Concerned to enter the intellectual ‘salon’ of nineteenth-century Europe and aware that it would only be open to them if based on universalist, rationalist principles, the Jewish intellectuals emphasized the rationalist aspects of Judaism and scrupulously avoided what went on in the cellar.’ Irrationalism or mysticism was swept under the rug, as were the revolutionary or apocalyptic tendencies in Jewish messianism. Social history was all but ignored in the desire to portray Judaism as an intellectual religion. The Wissenschaft des Judentums wrote Geistesgeschichte in which the Geist was predominantly rational.

Frequently steeped in rationalist ideas of progress, many nineteenth-century historians believed that Judaism's rational side was reaching fulfillment in modern times. Historiography’s purpose was to contribute to this elevated goal by purging Jewish history of all vestigial irrationalism: The Wissenschaft des Judentums wanted

> to remove the irrational stinger and banish the demonic enthusiasm from Jewish history through exaggerated theologizing and spiritualizing. This was actually the decisive original sin. This terrifying giant, our history, is called to task. . . and this enormous creature, full of destructive power, made up of vitality, evil and perfection, must contract itself, stunt its growth and declare that it has no substance. The demonic giant is nothing but a simple fool who fulfills the duties of a solid citizen and every decent Jewish bourgeois could unashamedly bid him good-day in the streets of the city, the immaculate city of the 19th century.”

This passage reads almost like a Nietzschean manifesto or a statement of Bergsonian vitalism from the turn of the century. Indeed, critics have attacked Scholem for extolling the “Dionysian” in Jewish history against the “Apollonian” spirit of the nineteenth century. We shall see that Scholem’s position is considerably more complicated than one might assume from this passage, for he uses the word “demonic” in a much more positive sense than the English suggests. Like Goethe's interpretation of the word déamonisch,” Scholem conceives of demonic irrationalism as a creative force: destruction is necessary for future construction. As opposed to the harmonious idea of progress adopted by the nineteenth-century historians, Scholem’s vision of Jewish history is a stormy dialectic of constructive and destructive forces, We shall examine in particular Scholem’s argument that the demonic Sabbatians of the seventeenth century prepared the ground for less destructive movements in the eighteenth, such as Hasidism and Enlightenment.
