By suppressing the “irrational,” the representatives of the Wissenschaft des Judentums considered Judaism moribund since they ignored precisely those elements that gave it vitality. This rationalist bias led them to their undialectical view of Jewish history and precluded the possibility of future life: The Wissenschaft des Judentums “became the mouthpiece of the [Jewish] bourgeoisie for whom the slogans of destruction and construction are equally infuriating because they want to go to sleep. This sleep is known as gradual progress, preservation of the status quo through reform.”” For Scholem, the Zionist revolutionary, the complacent reformism of bourgeois German Jewry held no promise for the future, and the fatal affection for the status quo infected the historiography of the period.

The nineteenth century's rationalism led directly, according to Scholem, to a tendency to “spiritualize” Judaism and freeze it in rigid theological dogma.” The sin of the Wissenschaft des Judentums was not just one-sided rationalism, but dogmatic rationalism. Judaism was defined by one and only one theological principle, although its formulation might vary from thinker to thinker. Scholem argues that this dogmatism reveals a fundamental misunderstanding of the history of Jewish theology. His own position does not culminate in a monolithic theology, but in an account of contradictory formulas. He maintains that Jewish theology, encompassing both rationalism and demonic irrationalism, is anarchistic:  it "yields no one authoritative formula or dogma. The very vitality of the Jewish tradition lies in this anarchism, since dogma, in Scholem’s view, is by definition lifeless. Scholem engages the nineteenth century precisely on its own territory of Geistesgeschichte and radically revises its conception of the nature of the Jewish Geist.

The final contradiction in which the Wissenschaft des Judentums became entangled was between the destructive and constructive poles of the secular historical method: ‘The conservative and destructive tendencies in [historical] science are bound up with one another. Historical criticism as a scientific method cannot escape this essential dialectic.” Historiography, like Jewish history itself, must involve a dialectic between romantic affirmation and demonic destruction. For Scholem, historical reasoning by nature is destructive, but out of the eradication of the moribund aspects of a tradition, historical criticism can “elevate the vestiges of the past to symbols of [new] life.” The Wissenschaft des Judentums lost this dialectical tension, however, and because it perceived its subject as moribund, it did not use historical criticism to rescue elements of the past for building a vital future. Instead, it regarded all of the
