past as equally irrelevant to the present, thus laying the basis for a positivistic, antiquarian method: the burial of the historical Corpse beneath mounds of indiscriminate facts. The final consequence of apologetics and dogmatic rationalism was the study of the Past for its own sake, divorced from the present: a “terrifying rite of burial.”’"4

Scholem does not lay the blame for the mistaken rationalist interpretation of Judaism solely on the Wissenschaft des Judentums. As the “academic mortician” of Judaism, nineteenth-century scholarship was more a symptom than a cause of the general rigor mortis of nineteenth-century Judaism. Scholem implies that historjography was necessarily doomed to failure in nineteenth-century Europe.'> The conflict between Jewish romanticism and the desire for emancipation and assimilation was characteristic of all German Jewish life. Because the European nations were not prepared to assimilate the Jews without demanding that they alter their identity beyond recognition, Jewish historiography had no choice but apologetics. Scholem’s criticism of the Wissenschaft des Judentums must be read as a Zionist critique of the possibility of a healthy Jewish life in Europe as a whole: although the Wissenschaft des Judentums started its career in the beginning of the nineteenth century with some laudable romantic goals, the social context prevented it from surviving the three contradictions mentioned above. For Scholem, the failure of Jewish historiography in the nineteenth century was only one aspect of the general crisis of Jewish bourgeois liberalism.

Scholem believes that Zionism has made possible a fundamental revision of the perspectives of Jewish historiography.16 No longer must historiography serve as a handmaiden to political apologetics or theological dogmatism. Jewish history can be considered “from within.” For Scholem, objective historiography is guaranteed by Zionism because Zionism is by definition antidogmatic: it stands above all particular interpretations of Judaism and is the one common denominator that unites all Jews. We will examine in the final chapter whether this claim of objectivity holds up in Scholem’s own historiography.

Scholem notes that some of the nineteenth-century writers were close to the nationalist position he advocates. He mentions specifically Heinrich Graetz and Nachman Krochmal, but points out that they were either remarkable exceptions or ignored altogether.” Even Graetz and Krochmal failed to treat the Kabbalah satisfactorily from Scholem’s point of view, although their “failures” would provide him with some fruitful sources. Against the theological historians of his day, Graetz Proposed a definition of Judaism as the
