sum total of all its historical manifestations. Whereas Graetz failed to accomplish this kind of pluralistic historiography in Europe because of the hostile demands of the age, Scholem maintains that he can fulfill Graetz’s program in the land of Israel. He accepts Graetz’s historicist definition of the “essence” of Judaism, but rejects the possibility of realizing it without a Jewish national homeland. He implicitly claims to complete Graetz’s program by giving equal weight to the irrationalist factors in Jewish history which Graetz was compelled to ignore or denigrate.

With other radical Zionists, Scholem argues that historiography, no less than any other sphere of Jewish life, needs national “normalization” in order to flourish. He explicitly rejects Chaim Nachman Bialik’s belief that the Wissenschaft des Judentums could have succeeded had its language been Hebrew.18 Language in and of itself could not effect the revolutionary change necessary for a new historiography: Zionism had to take the correct impulses in the Wissenschaft des Judentums and quite literally transplant them to the new soil of Israel.

Despite Scholem’s belief in the importance of Zionism as the basis for a new historiography, he never understood national “nor-  malization” to mean chauvinistic nationalism. As a youth in Germany during World War I, he became inalterably opposed to the degeneration of modern nationalism and developed great sympathy for political anarchism. His Zionism was always a revolt against the authoritarian and jingoistic tendencies in nationalism to which Zionism was also prey: the Jews must not be “like all the other nations.”

His essay on the Wissenschaft des Judentums was directed as much against his nationalist colleagues at the Hebrew University as against the nineteenth century. If the Wissenschaft des Judentums had degenerated into pure antiquarian negation, the new nationalist historians often went to the opposite extreme: uncritical glorification. Desiring to restore pride in Jewish history, they frequently reverted to the pious affirmations of the orthodox, but in a nationalist idiom:

> We came to rebel but we ended up continuing [in the same path]... All these plagues have now disguised themselves in nationalism. From the frying pan into the fire: after the emptiness of assimilation comes another, that of nationalist excess. We have cultivated nationalist “sermons” and “rhetoric” (melitza) in science to take the place of religious sermons and rhetoric. In both cases, the real forces operating in our world, the genuine demonic remains outside the picture we have created."
