# From Sergius to Matta: Aristotle and Pseudo-Dionysius in Syriac Tradition

## IBSN: 978-0-429-44523-1

## Sergius

Sergius’ commentary on the Categories of Aristotle addressed to Theodore is the earliest known major work in Syriac on the subject of Aristotelian logic. 2 Although the original title of the work is unknown, this designation is a fair description, for fi ve of its seven chapters run broadly in parallel to the text of Aristotle. It is, however, clear that it is a commentary in the tradition of the Alexandrians already through the contents of the fi rst two chapters, in which the Categories is viewed as the fi rst work in a much more extensive curriculum, the overall form of which  is presented here before entering into the particular subject matter of the Cate- gories itself. Thus Sergius’ fi rst chapter deals with the divisions of philosophy,  the divisions of the works of Aristotle, and the question as to whether logic is a part or instrument of philosophy. In Chapter 2 he presents the divisions and the sequence of Aristotle’s works on philosophy as a whole and logic in particular, the reason why the Philosopher made a point of being obscure, and the aim of the Categories , following which he discusses the species of discourse before going on to a presentation of the ten categories and a discussion of naming (cf. Categories 1–3). These two chapters therefore deal with some, but by no means all, or even  the majority, of the standard preliminary questions treated by the Greek Alexan- drians at the start of their commentaries on the Categories . Sergius was therefore  a disciple of his Alexandrian masters, but a selective one. While accepting, at the start of Chapter 1, the well-known description of philosophy as assimilation to God, 3 he did not, like his master Ammonius, pose the question of the utility of the entire Aristotelian philosophy, or answer that it is to ascend to the arkhē of all things and to know that it is the One Goodness itself. 4  Nowhere, to the best of our knowledge, did Sergius designate the study of Aristotle as inferior to that of Plato or preliminary to it.

In the prologue of the work he named Aristotle as the origin and beginning of all knowledge for all physicians and philosophers. Aristotle had assembled all the scattered parts of philosophy and fashioned from them ‘the perfect and admirable form of the science of all that is’. 5  While only an exposition of the logic, and of that only the Categories , is extant from the hand of Sergius, it is clear that logic
and the Categories are not especially privileged within his overall view of Aristo- tle’s signifi cance. He intended to treat the whole of the Aristotelian autoprosōpa ,  not merely the logic or the Categories , although we do not know whether he ever did so. The Categories was the fi rst work of the curriculum, and that was where all the Alexandrians began. His intention was therefore in respect of Aristotle the same as theirs. In Chapter 2 he writes:

> We will now speak as (well as) we can about the aim of each one of these treatises, beginning the chain with that On Categories , which is about simple namings, 6  and similarly treating each one of them in the same way. Then we will go on to his other treatises, those on the parts of practice, (then) physics and mathematics, and (then) the last ones which are called ‘divine’.

This in turn refl ected, as he believed, Aristotle’s own procedure:

> Because logic has been shown to be an instrument which clearly dif- ferentiates in knowledge truth from falsehood, and in practice marks  out good from bad, this philosopher wished to construct this art of logic before his other writings on all these things – namely, on all practical (matters), and on physics, mathematics, and spiritual (matters) 7 – for it fulfi ls for him in each of these the need of an instrument. And because logic is a true demonstration, but a demonstration derived from correctly posited syllogisms, and preceding a syllogism is another combination of  two or three terms, and preceding that are simple namings, for this rea- son Aristotle began in his treatises on the art of logic with the doctrine of  simple namings and after these taught about their fi rst and simple combi- nation, and similarly after that, (following) in order, about the syllogism,  from which demonstrations arise, and after these (i.e. demonstrations) about things useful in all ways to the support of demonstrations. 8 He did  this with art and learning, not casually, as in the past. 9

Whether or not Sergius ever wrote an exposition of these other works, no Syr- iac reader of this who followed his line of thought could have supposed that the  value of Aristotle’s writings was limited to the logic, or to that of the so-called  ‘truncated Organon ’ terminating at Prior Analytics I, 7. In the realm of phys- ics, Sergius translated the pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo10 and translated and  adapted Alexander’s On the Principles of the Universe .  11 In that of theology he translated (with adaptations) Pseudo-Dionysius 12 and prefaced it with his own previously composed Memra on the Spiritual Life .  13 As an intelligent student of Neoplatonic philosophers in Alexandria, Sergius must surely have been aware of the similarities between Dionysius and the Neoplatonism of Proclus, whatever he  thought about the identity of ‘Dionysius the Areopagite’. While we have no evi- dence that he followed his Alexandrian teachers in considering Aristotle inferior
or propaedeutic to Plato, in his enthusiasm for Dionysius evident in his translation of the corpus we have reason to suppose that he remained nevertheless to some extent true to those Alexandrian teachers in seeing Aristotle as inferior to a ‘more divine’ pedagogue. That pedagogue, however, was not Plato as interpreted by Proclus, but the Holy Scriptures as interpreted by Dionysius.

The Neoplatonic curriculum of Plato reading which followed that of Aristotle  proceeded in parallel with that posited for Aristotle, the theoretical dialogues pro- ceeding from the logical (those dealing with words and concepts) to the physical  and then the theological. 14 If we now endeavour to understand how Sergius might have related his reading of Aristotle to the ‘higher’ cycle not of Plato, but of his Christian Bible as interpreted by Pseudo-Dionysius, the key text at our disposal is his Memra on the Spiritual Life . Here he asserts that ‘the science of theoria is  divided according to the ranks of the things over which it spreads’, and he enu- merates seven parts:

1. subsists by means of demonstrations and combinations of worded statements;
2. is made known in the hidden silence of the intellect without word;
3. extends over the visible natures;
4. ascends to the hidden substancies higher than vision;
5. relates to the faculties adjoining the visible natures;
6. resides in the things which afterwards enter from outside into rational natures through their freedom;
7. which is like its fi nest fl ower, by means of all those (already) mentioned touches, as far as is permitted, on the exalted radiance of the hidden divinity. 15

Subsequently Sergius relates that the men ‘expert’ in (3) call it ‘natural’ (science), and (5) is called ‘mathematics’, (4) ‘spiritual theoria or divine science’, (6) ‘second natural science’, and (7) ‘divine theoria ’. The last of these is termed ‘the hidden and veiled vision of the intellect which reaches out, as much as is possible, through  some distant similarity between (the two of) them, towards the unfathomable radi- ance of Being’ 16 and later on identifi ed in ‘the Lord’s teaching’ as the ‘Kingdom of  God’, 17 while (4) is identifi ed with the scriptural ‘Kingdom of Heaven’. 18 Different sorts of theoria correspond to the difference of the objects, ascending upwards to the fi rst form, ‘which is not a knowledge but an excess of ignorance and superior to knowledge’. 19 Elsewhere Sergius presents us with a threefold division of the contemplative life, ascending from ‘knowledge of sensible and visible natures’ or ‘natural knowledge’, through ‘ theoria of rational and invisible natures’ or ‘spiritual theoria ’, to ‘ theoria of that which is beyond nature’ or ‘divine contemplation’. 20

We appear therefore to have two parallel, three- or four-part ascending curric- ula, one philosophical and the other monastic and theological. 21 Each has its own  organon : in (1) we can recognise Aristotle’s logic, in (2) its theological counter- part, probably (although not exclusively) of Evagrian inspiration. 22 In (3), (4),  and (5) we recognise (Aristotelian) physics, metaphysics, and mathematics, 23 in (6) and (4) Evagrius’ ‘second natural science’ and ‘spiritual theoria or divine
science’. 24 In (7) Pseudo-Dionysius is to the fore, 25 but linked with Evagrius (‘divine theoria ’). 26 The second cycle is thus not constructed from a Neoplatonic Plato, but from two Christian masters, Evagrius and Dionysius.

Elsewhere in the treatise 27 Sergius divides contemplations into height, depth, and length and breadth ( Eph . 3, 18), corresponding to fi rst, intermediate, and last. In the parallel curricula thus posited, mathematics is intermediate between physics and metaphysics in the Aristotelian cycle, ‘second natural science’ in the  Evagrian scheme, also designated ‘spiritual theoria ’, ‘divine science’, or ‘King- dom of Heaven’, intermediate between ‘natural science’ and ‘divine theoria ’,  or ‘Kingdom of God’. 28 As the pagan philosophers saw the Platonic corpus as ‘higher’ than the Aristotelian, albeit broadly parallel to it, Sergius no doubt saw the Evagrian-Dionysian cursus as a ‘higher’ parallel to the Aristotelian.

Sergius therefore looks to be integrating the Aristotelian philosophy he acquired in Alexandria into a theological cursus which, if not designed solely for monks, was certainly particularly appropriate for them. It was his view, expressed towards the end of the Categories commentary, that without Aristotle’s logic not only medicine and philosophy cannot be understood, but neither ‘can the true sense be uncovered of the divine Scriptures, wherein lies the hope of our salvation 29 – unless it should be that someone receives divine ability thanks to the exalted nature of his way of life, with the result that he has no need for human instruction’. 30 He allows therefore that some who live an exalted way of life can do without ‘human instruction’, and it may be surmised from this that some could attain to the Evagrian-Dionysian theoria without the benefi t (or at any rate the full benefi t)  of the Aristotelian. This may help to explain the profi le of translation and com- mentary in Sergius’ œuvre : translation (or translation and adaptation) of Galen,  Dionysius, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo , but no translation of, only commentary on, the (fi rst treatise of) Aristotle’s autoprosōpa . Even if the old anonymous Syriac version of the Categories existed at the time Sergius wrote his commentary, Sergius did not presuppose it in his exposition. 31 If his commentary was thus intended to facilitate philosophical study by Syrians, Aristotle himself had to be studied in Greek. A Syrian elite able to read Greek certainly existed, and they were perhaps quite numerous, 32 but in the other strand of Sergius’ ‘two strand curriculum’, the Scriptures, Evagrius, and Dionysius were  all available in Syriac, the last of them courtesy of none other than Sergius him- self. For Graeco-Syriac bilinguals he therefore provided a Syriac commentary  (completed or extant only on the Categories ) as an aid to understanding the Greek text of Aristotle; but for other Syrians, especially physicians and monks, whose way of life or divine aid gave them ‘some ability’ without the necessity of direct  access to the standard Aristotelian corpus, he provided some translations, princi- pally of Galen and Dionysius. These latter, monolingual Syrians might also, to  be sure, have been included in the intended readership of his commentaries, if he considered a derivative and simplifi ed knowledge of Aristotle to be of some value, though this would have differed radically from that of the students in Alexandria, who possessed both the Aristotelian text and the commentators’ expositions. The
limitation of direct contact with the autoprosōpa to those able to read Greek was,  however, removed over time as the treatises of Aristotle were translated into Syr- iac during the next two or three centuries.

Sergius, however, was undoubtedly able to see that the obscurity with which, according to Ammonius, Aristotle veiled his teaching was analogous to that with which, according to Dionysius, the Scriptures veiled the divine mysteries. In explaining Aristotle’s obscurity he asserts, following Ammonius, that

> just as those celebrating any mysteries do not manifest them in front of everyone, but perform them in inner rooms and behind coverings so that they are known only to those who are partakers of the mysteries, so also he veiled the science of logic by the obscurity of the terms so that it would therefore not be disclosed to undisciplined and deceitful people, but to those whose mind is worthy of teaching such as this and who desire to labour with all their strength at fi ne (things) . . . those whose mind is brittle and whose will is inclined to laziness and who are eager in everything for corporeal pleasures would immediately become feeble and abstain from the knowledge of things, but those whose nature has kinship with knowledge and are ready for the teachings about everything not only do not become weak and give up when they see obscurity, but all the more strengthen their mind and devote themselves to great effort to get into the knowledge of what is said. 33

Sergius wrote this about the obscurity in which the teaching of Aristotle was  expressed, but he was well aware that analogous statements were made by Dio- nysius about the sacred, mystical teachings of the Scriptures. 34 Evagrius, too,  employed an intentional obscurity in the theological tradition of Origen and the Cappadocians. 35 Purity and ‘stretching of the mind’ were therefore necessary in  both strands of the curriculum. If the ‘instruments’ of the two strands may there- fore appear rather different but nevertheless have an inner coherence, the same  also applies to the ‘summits’. The problem of reconciling Aristotle’s Metaphysics  with Plato’s theology was already faced by the Alexandrians, who asked why Aris- totle called the fi rst principle Mind, while Plato called it the Good. The answer of  the later Neoplatonists was that Aristotle wrote the Metaphysics straight after the Physics , and for that reason spoke of Mind as closer to nature than the Good. They had no doubt that Aristotle’s fi rst principle was the One, and cited the Homeric quotation at the end of Metaphysics Λ: ‘let One be the ruler’. 36 If Sergius saw in his two-strand curriculum a similar problem between Dionysius and Aristotle’s  talk of Mind, his answer could naturally have been taken from Dionysius him- self: ‘Of course the mystical traditions of the revealing words sometimes hymn  the majesty of the supersubstantial thearchy as Word, Mind and Substance’. 37 He might also, however, have seen a solution in the same way as we see it solved by the later Neoplatonists: differences in terminology are to be explained in relation to the context of a treatise within the whole ‘ascending’ curriculum.
## Between Sergius and Matta

Sergius was a physician and translated Galen. It is widely recognised therefore that philosophical studies, already closely associated with the medical in Greek late antiquity, made their entry into Syriac tradition in association with medicine, and this link is evident again in Baghdad in the Abbasid period and the activity of Ḥunayn. Sergius’ integration of Aristotelian studies with an ascetic-spiritual cursus enabled them also to become part of Syriac monastic tradition, at any rate of that segment of Syriac monastic tradition sympathetic to Greek philosophy. Zacharias’ Life of Severus gives us good grounds to suppose that the philosophical school at Alexandria attracted many who would subsequently enter monastic life, and that Sergius was only one of several drawn to the Greek schools of higher education from the Syriac-speaking area. 38 Within a number of Syriac monasteries there were those able to read Greek, notably in that of Qenneshre, originally the monastery of St. Thomas in the Greek Seleucia-on-Orontes and transferred from there around 530 to the banks of the Euphrates by John Bar Aphtonia, himself a  native of Edessa who probably wrote only in Greek. 39 Those who translated Aris- totle into Syriac clearly had access to Greek manuscripts, were able themselves  to study him through the medium of the Greek text, but for educational reasons – sometimes perhaps in connection with their own teaching – thought it valuable to  have a Syriac translation. To posit a ‘Syriac tradition’ of Aristotelian studies sepa- rate from the ‘Greek tradition’ between the sixth and ninth centuries 40 is therefore,  for the bilinguals, quite unrealistic. 41 The bilingual tradition of alumni from Syriac  monastic schools can be traced right through to the (trilingual) Catholicus Timo- thy I, who described Syriac as his own language but made clear that he had also  studied Greek and Arabic. 42

This bilingual tradition was keenly interested in both Aristotle and Dionysius, and the ongoing work of extending and ‘improving’ the Syriac translations of Aristotle (that is, by making them ever more closely mirror the Greek) by the scholars associated with Qenneshre seems to have proceeded alongside similar work on the Syriac version of Dionysius. Athanasius of Balad was, to the best  of our knowledge, the fi rst to carry the Syriac Organon as far as the Sophisti- cal Refutations , and he also produced a version of Dionysius (and Gregory of  Nazianzus). 43 It is very likely that Aristotle was read in Qenneshre together with  (at least some of the) Greek commentators who were used or who taught in Alex- andria. Jacob of Edessa’s revision of the old anonymous Syriac version of the  Categories appears to show evidence of having been produced or read in associ- ation with Greek commentaries, as indeed does the old version itself, 44 and there  is a (late) report that Jacob spent some time in Alexandria. 45 George, bishop of the Arabs, issued his translations of the Categories , De interpretatione , and Prior  Analytics together with commentaries which clearly are indebted to the Alexan- drian tradition. 46 There is no need to assume that the monastic school of Qenne- shre became a centre of Greek philosophical studies only in the seventh century  under the direction of Severus Sebokht; it is likely that it was already such in the
sixth, and quite possibly even while it was still that of St. Thomas at Seleucia. Furthermore, a bilingual monastic school whose members were interested in both  Aristotle and Dionysius is likely to have been interested also in the writings, com- mentaries, and translations of Sergius. 47 We can trace a link from there to Bagh- dad, for Athanasius’ translations of both Aristotle and Dionysius were known to  Timothy, and (for Aristotle) also to the Syro-Arabic Baghdad Aristotelians who produced the Arabic ‘Paris Organon ’. 48 Timothy, furthermore, was aware of ‘the Commentary of Olympiodorus on the books of the logic, and of Stephanus and of Sergius and of Alexander’, 49 as well as translations of Dionysius by Athanasius and Phocas. 50 In his famous 1930 essay Max Meyerhof, on the dubious basis of  al-Fārābī’s ideologically motivated narrative, had the School of Alexandria relo- cating to Antioch and Ḥarrān on a peregrination to Baghdad. 51 He might have  been nearer the mark if in his time more had been known about the activities of the Qenneshre scholars and their infl uence, and of the migration of that monastery from the Orontes to the Euphrates. 52

Phocas’ preface to his translation of Dionysius affords a valuable insight into  this bilingual culture towards the end of the seventh century, as also into the infl u- ence of Sergius’ edition of Dionysius. Remarking on the writings of Dionysius,  interpreted long ago from Greek to Syriac by Sergius in a translation ‘which all of us, Syrians, have read’, he observes that there are obscure interpretations therein too elevated for the multitude, some of which he has omitted and some retained for the advantage of those who ‘like us have penetrated the knowledge of these interpretations’. ‘By divine providence’ Dionysius has come into his hands in the  original Greek with the scholia and preface of John of Scythopolis, and a pref- ace by George of Scythopolis. Phocas furthermore notes that many of the diffi cult  words have been researched in the manuals which comment on the Greek of the period and reported in the traditions of other workers such as Athanasius and Jacob of Edessa, who by their ability cleared the way as much as is possible and in some manner conjoined the two languages. 53 On the Aristotelian side, the translated works of the Qenneshre scholars were, as far as we know, limited to the Organon , but many of those able to read Greek, like Jacob of Edessa, also studied physics,  mathematics, and metaphysics. While among works on astronomy and the natu- ral sciences Syriac scholars of late antique and Umayyad times apparently trans- lated only some elementary treatises, many still had the capacity to read the more  advanced Greek writings in the original. 54 While the only known Syriac translation of Euclid probably comes from the early Abbasid period, 55 the seventh or eighth century undertext of a ninth century Syriac palimpsest copied at the monastery of Qartmin contains the Elements in Greek. 56 Apparently study not only of Greek, but of Greek geometry, was alive in that monastery in the seventh or eighth century, although no Syriac translation of Euclid is known from that time. Jacob of Edessa’s engagement with physics and metaphysics – all in association with his theological interests – is shown by his Hexaemeron and his Encheiridion .

The letters of Timothy are evidence that the study of the whole of the Organon , as also the Syriac translations of Athanasius, had reached Baghdad and the East
Syrian church by the end of the eighth century. 58 Timothy, nevertheless, clearly presupposed that the fullest resources for study of Aristotle were still not to be found in the Abbasid capital, but in the West Syrian monasteries, as we know from his efforts to fi nd further material in the libraries of Mār Mattai and Mār Zina. He himself had been educated at the East Syrian monastery of Bashosh, where he may have fi rst encountered Aristotle. 59 He was trilingual, although he considered Syriac to be his own language, and while clearly preferring to read the texts in this language, he could compare a Syriac text with the Greek when occasion required, as he did with a passage in Athanasius’ version of the Posterior Analytics . In asking his correspondent Pethion to look at Mār Mattai for ‘some commentary or  scholia by anyone, whether Syriac or not, to . . . the Topics , Sophistical Refuta- tions , Rhetoric and Poetics ’, he was evidently happy to receive them in Greek or  Syriac, and at Mār Zina he asked his correspondent to look for ‘the two treatises on poets (i.e. Aristotle’s Poetics ), for I have one’. As already noted, he knew of the  commentaries of Olympiodorus, Stephanus, Sergius, and Alexander (of Aphrodi- sias), and of versions of Dionysius by Athanasius and Phocas. As is well known,  he himself was a translator, or at least the ‘overseer’ of Abū Nūḥ’s translation, of the Topics from Syriac to Arabic, by commission of the caliph al-Mahdī.

Around a century after Timothy we encounter in Baghdad the East Syrian whose rigorous focus on Aristotle (unlike the more diverse interests of Ḥunayn  and al-Kindī) and whose establishment of a group or school of Aristotelian philos- ophy gave rise to al-Fārābī’s imaginary peregrination of the school of philosophy  from Alexandria to Baghdad. Abū Bišr Mattā (died 940) was ignorant of Greek,  but was an active translator of Aristotle and Aristotelian commentators from Syr- iac to Arabic, as were his pupil Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī and Yaḥyā’s pupil Ibn Zur‘a, both  West Syrians, more of whose works have survived than those of Mattā. 61 Among the extant works of the latter two, we have evidence of interest in the writings of Dionysius (see the following).

We can therefore trace over a period of around fi ve hundred years (Sergius died in 536, Ibn Zur‘a in 1008) a series of Graeco-Syriac followed by Syro-Arabic  translators and commentators of Aristotle who were also closely interested in Dio- nysius. (Among the following only for Theophilus and Mattā do we currently  lack such evidence relating to Dionysius.) Excluding the anonymous translators and others who cannot be associated directly with Alexandria, Qenneshre, or Baghdad, as translators from Greek to Syriac of Aristotle or Aristotelian writings, we can adduce, prior to Ḥunayn and his school, Sergius (pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo and Alexander’s On the Principles of the Universe ), Athanasius (died 687,  Prior Analytics to Sophistical Refutations ), Jacob of Edessa (died 708, Catego- ries ), George, bishop of the Arabs (died 724, Categories to Prior Analytics ), and  Theophilus of Edessa, the astrologer to al-Mahdī (died 785, Prior Analytics and  Sophistical Refutations ). Both Sergius and Athanasius made translations of Dio- nysius, while commentaries on Aristotle were written by Sergius ( Categories )  and George ( Categories to Prior Analytics ), an epitome of Aristotle’s logic by Athanasius, and an Encheiridion with passages taken (directly or indirectly) from
Aristotle’s Metaphysics by Jacob of Edessa. As translators in Baghdad of Aris- totle and his commentators from Syriac to Arabic we can name prior to Ḥunayn  Timothy (died 823, Topics ), and subsequent to Ḥunayn Mattā (died 940, Posterior  Analytics , Sophistical Refutations , Poetics , De caelo , De gen. et corr ., Meteo- rologica , Metaphysics Λ, commentaries by Alexander, Themistius, and Olympi- odorus), Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī (died 975, Categories , Topics , Sophistical Refutations ,  Poetics , Physics , De anima ?, Metaphysics Λ and Μ, commentaries by Alexander, Themistius, and Olympiodorus), and Ibn Zur‘a ( Sophistical Refutations , Book of Animals ). Timothy, Yaḥyā, and Ibn Zur‘a were all familiar with Dionysius, and as already noted Timothy knew of commentaries on Aristotle. Commentaries on Aristotle were written by Mattā ( Categories to Topics , Physics , Metaphysics α), Yaḥyā ( Categories to Sophistical Refutations , Physics , De caelo ?, Metaphysics α), and Ibn Zur‘a (various). 62

## The school of Matta

The earliest known Syriac translations of treatises of Aristotle other than those of the logic are those stemming from the school of Ḥunayn. Ḥunayn’s translations covered a wider range than those from the school of Mattā, particularly because they included his numerous medical translations. Insight into the curriculum of Mattā’s school can be gained from the Fihrist of Ibn al-Nadīm, but also to some degree from The Philosophy of Aristotle of al-Fārābī, the school’s most illustrious pupil. The fi rst twelve treatises of Aristotle listed in the Fihrist appear in the same  sequence in al-Fārābī’s work: these are the eight treatises of the Organon ( Cate- gories to Poetics ) and the four principal physical treatises ( Physics , De caelo , De  gen. et corr ., and Meteorologica ), 63 thus the eight instrumental and four principal physical treatises of the Alexandrian autoprosōpa .  64 Mattā is said to have written commentaries on the fi rst fi ve of these and on the Physics , and to have made translations of commentaries on the last three. 65 Of the remaining three of these, Quwairā, with whom he studied, is said to have written a commentary on the  Sophistical Refutations , Mattā’s follower al-Fārābī, as is well known, wrote sev- eral (partially extant) works on the Rhetoric , and Mattā himself translated the  Poetics . 66 The only other treatise to be mentioned in connection with Mattā, apart from a cryptic reference in the section On Sense ,  67 is the ultimate book in the Fihrist ’s and al-Fārābī’s lists, 68 the Metaphysics , of which Mattā translated Book Λ with the commentaries of Alexander and Themistius 69 and, as we know from elsewhere, wrote a commentary on Book α.  70 From this information the conclu- sion can reasonably be drawn that Mattā’s curriculum of Aristotle reading was  that of the Alexandrians: the eight organika , the four principal physica , and the one theological treatise, the Metaphysics . 71

In the Philosophy of Aristotle , however, al-Fārābī lists, between the Meteoro- logica and the Metaphysics , many of the biological treatises (including the De  anima ), several of which also appear (in slightly different form and sequence) as numbers thirteen to fi fteen in the Fihrist .  72 If we now look at the treatises which
were known to al-Kindī, a quite different picture emerges. Al-Kindī appears to have been seriously interested in only one of the organika (the Prior Analytics ) and two of the four ‘general’ physica ( De caelo and Meteorologica ), but almost all  the biological treatises (the Alexandrians’ biological ‘intermediate’ works) men- tioned by al-Fārābī.  73 It looks therefore as if al-Fārābī added to the curriculum he knew from Mattā’s school, which was essentially the Alexandrian curriculum, works which had been popular in al-Kindī’s circle. 74 Only in the case of Ibn Zur‘a do we fi nd evidence of any interest in the biological treatises on the part of a member of the school of Mattā.  75 Even allowing for the ‘asymmetrical’ nature of this evidence (the Fihrist on the one side and modern linguistic analysis on the other), it points fairly clearly to Mattā’s group, not al-Kindī’s, as the inheritors of the Alexandrian tradition. The Alexandrian curriculum of Aristotelian philosophy did not reach Mattā through al-Kindī.

The information in the Fihrist on the Greek commentators is also signifi cant. The Organon fell into two parts, each of four treatises: the logical method itself (the Posterior Analytics and its three necessary preliminaries, Categories to Prior Analytics ), and secondly the other four useful but less logically rigorous treatises ( Topics to Poetics ). There were numerous Greek commentaries on part one, many fewer on part two (as Timothy was aware). 76 It is when we come to those on the  physical treatises and the Metaphysics that three names stand out: Alexander, The- mistius, and Olympiodorus. 77 It looks as if these three were especially favoured  by Mattā, and it is unlikely that the signifi cant overlap with those mentioned by Timothy (died 823) a century or more earlier (Olympiodorus, Stephanus, Sergius,  and Alexander) 78 is purely coincidental. On the basis of this evidence it may there- fore be suggested that the heart (if not the totality) of the teaching in the School  of the Baghdad Aristotelians under Mattā’s direction consisted of the eight trea- tises of the Organon , the four treatises on physics, and the Metaphysics , together  with several of their Greek commentators, principally Alexander, Themistius, and Olympiodorus. 79 Since they did not know Greek, the Syro-Arabic teachers in Mattā’s school depended on Graeco-Syriac (or Graeco-Arabic) translations from the school of Ḥunayn or from earlier translators, but the identifi cation of most of these works for particular study within an Aristotelian curriculum was not due to Ḥunayn (809–876) or his son Isḥāq (died 911). They had been identifi ed, with the exception of the excluded physica , in the Hellenophile Syriac monastic schools, particularly Qenneshre, which maintained this modifi ed version of the curriculum taught in Alexandria. 80

Among the little that is extant from the writings of Mattā is the fragment already noted from his commentary on Metaphysics α.  81 We do have some trea- tises, however, from Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī and Ibn Zur‘a, and in these we can observe  the continuing interest in Dionysius on the part of Syriac Christian Aristotelians. Yaḥyā’s treatise On the Unity draws both on Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ 6 and on the Neoplatonic doctrine of the triad known in Proclus and Dionysius, who was probably one of the inspirations of Yaḥyā.  82 This is all the more likely in view of the fact that Yaḥyā’s pupil Ibn Zur‘a drew on Dionysius to answer why the
Scriptures spoke of ‘Father, Son and Holy Spirit’ if the reality embedded in these expressions was the ‘Mind, Intelligizing and Thought’ of Aristotle’s Metaphysics Λ 9. The answer according to Ibn Zur‘a was not only that holy things should not be given to the dogs and pearls cast before swine ( Matthew 7, 6), but also, as explained by ‘the virtuous and excellent Dionysius’, that fi gurative expressions applied to divine things can push those who seek the truth to understand why these expressions have been employed. 83 While the idea that fi gurative expressions can ‘push those who seek the truth to understand’ is not unique to Dionysius, it is not without signifi cance that it was to Dionysius (among others) that Ibn Zur‘a  appealed when bringing together the teachings of Christian theology and Aris- totelian metaphysics. 84 Yaḥyā might not have been the fi rst Christian to connect  Metaphysics Λ 9 with the Trinity; the text was already interpreted theologically by Themistius. 85 While Neoplatonic theology joined with Aristotelian philosophy was domesticated in Islam by the Theology of Aristotle ,  86 for its domestication in  Christianity the basis was the corpus of Dionysius.

A modern analogy may serve to make clear the conclusion towards which this evidence is leading. It was not the hardware (the institution and its personnel) which migrated by stages from Alexandria to Baghdad, as al-Fārābī fantasised and Meyerhof believed, but the software (the curriculum). Beginning with Sergius, the original Alexandrian ‘program’ was ‘copied’ with various additions and modifi - cations over the years: the substitution of the Bible and Dionysius for Plato and pagan Neoplatonism, of Evagrian-monastic spirituality for the propaedeutic moral instruction (from Epictetus or Pseudo-Pythagoras) of the pagan philosophers, the gradual accumulation of Syriac versions and commentaries of Aristotle alongside the Greek and the Greeks, and the emphasis on the Organon (and to some degree the Metaphysics ) at the expense of the physical treatises (in the pre-Abbasid period). 87 The ‘hardware’ on which the successive revisions of this ‘program’ was run was the Syriac monastic schools, until it fi nally lost its Greek language component and acquired a new bilingual version in Syriac and Arabic. In Abbasid Baghdad the hardware for the new Syro-Arabic program was a multi-religious school, the teachers predominantly Christian, the students (and the surrounding environment) increasingly Muslim – somewhat mirroring the pagan teachers and growing body of Christian students and environment in Alexandria. In Alexandria Sergius broke from the Plato and Proclus of his pagan masters and linked Aristotle in the program with the Bible and Dionysius. Around four centuries later in Baghdad, al-Fārābī  broke from the Bible and Dionysius of his Christian masters and re-united the Cor- pus Aristotelicum with (whatever he knew of) Plato and Proclus.
