# From Sergius to Matta: Aristotle and Pseudo-Dionysius in Syriac Tradition

## IBSN: 978-0-429-44523-1

## Sergius

Sergius’ commentary on the Categories of Aristotle addressed to Theodore is the earliest known major work in Syriac on the subject of Aristotelian logic. 2 Although the original title of the work is unknown, this designation is a fair description, for fi ve of its seven chapters run broadly in parallel to the text of Aristotle. It is, however, clear that it is a commentary in the tradition of the Alexandrians already through the contents of the fi rst two chapters, in which the Categories is viewed as the fi rst work in a much more extensive curriculum, the overall form of which  is presented here before entering into the particular subject matter of the Cate- gories itself. Thus Sergius’ fi rst chapter deals with the divisions of philosophy,  the divisions of the works of Aristotle, and the question as to whether logic is a part or instrument of philosophy. In Chapter 2 he presents the divisions and the sequence of Aristotle’s works on philosophy as a whole and logic in particular, the reason why the Philosopher made a point of being obscure, and the aim of the Categories , following which he discusses the species of discourse before going on to a presentation of the ten categories and a discussion of naming (cf. Categories 1–3). These two chapters therefore deal with some, but by no means all, or even  the majority, of the standard preliminary questions treated by the Greek Alexan- drians at the start of their commentaries on the Categories . Sergius was therefore  a disciple of his Alexandrian masters, but a selective one. While accepting, at the start of Chapter 1, the well-known description of philosophy as assimilation to God, 3 he did not, like his master Ammonius, pose the question of the utility of the entire Aristotelian philosophy, or answer that it is to ascend to the arkhē of all things and to know that it is the One Goodness itself. 4  Nowhere, to the best of our knowledge, did Sergius designate the study of Aristotle as inferior to that of Plato or preliminary to it.

In the prologue of the work he named Aristotle as the origin and beginning of all knowledge for all physicians and philosophers. Aristotle had assembled all the scattered parts of philosophy and fashioned from them ‘the perfect and admirable form of the science of all that is’. 5  While only an exposition of the logic, and of that only the Categories , is extant from the hand of Sergius, it is clear that logic
