and the Categories are not especially privileged within his overall view of Aristo- tle’s signifi cance. He intended to treat the whole of the Aristotelian autoprosōpa ,  not merely the logic or the Categories , although we do not know whether he ever did so. The Categories was the fi rst work of the curriculum, and that was where all the Alexandrians began. His intention was therefore in respect of Aristotle the same as theirs. In Chapter 2 he writes:

> We will now speak as (well as) we can about the aim of each one of these treatises, beginning the chain with that On Categories , which is about simple namings, 6  and similarly treating each one of them in the same way. Then we will go on to his other treatises, those on the parts of practice, (then) physics and mathematics, and (then) the last ones which are called ‘divine’.

This in turn refl ected, as he believed, Aristotle’s own procedure:

> Because logic has been shown to be an instrument which clearly dif- ferentiates in knowledge truth from falsehood, and in practice marks  out good from bad, this philosopher wished to construct this art of logic before his other writings on all these things – namely, on all practical (matters), and on physics, mathematics, and spiritual (matters) 7 – for it fulfi ls for him in each of these the need of an instrument. And because logic is a true demonstration, but a demonstration derived from correctly posited syllogisms, and preceding a syllogism is another combination of  two or three terms, and preceding that are simple namings, for this rea- son Aristotle began in his treatises on the art of logic with the doctrine of  simple namings and after these taught about their fi rst and simple combi- nation, and similarly after that, (following) in order, about the syllogism,  from which demonstrations arise, and after these (i.e. demonstrations) about things useful in all ways to the support of demonstrations. 8 He did  this with art and learning, not casually, as in the past. 9

Whether or not Sergius ever wrote an exposition of these other works, no Syr- iac reader of this who followed his line of thought could have supposed that the  value of Aristotle’s writings was limited to the logic, or to that of the so-called  ‘truncated Organon ’ terminating at Prior Analytics I, 7. In the realm of phys- ics, Sergius translated the pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo10 and translated and  adapted Alexander’s On the Principles of the Universe .  11 In that of theology he translated (with adaptations) Pseudo-Dionysius 12 and prefaced it with his own previously composed Memra on the Spiritual Life .  13 As an intelligent student of Neoplatonic philosophers in Alexandria, Sergius must surely have been aware of the similarities between Dionysius and the Neoplatonism of Proclus, whatever he  thought about the identity of ‘Dionysius the Areopagite’. While we have no evi- dence that he followed his Alexandrian teachers in considering Aristotle inferior
