science’. 24 In (7) Pseudo-Dionysius is to the fore, 25 but linked with Evagrius (‘divine theoria ’). 26 The second cycle is thus not constructed from a Neoplatonic Plato, but from two Christian masters, Evagrius and Dionysius.

Elsewhere in the treatise 27 Sergius divides contemplations into height, depth, and length and breadth ( Eph . 3, 18), corresponding to fi rst, intermediate, and last. In the parallel curricula thus posited, mathematics is intermediate between physics and metaphysics in the Aristotelian cycle, ‘second natural science’ in the  Evagrian scheme, also designated ‘spiritual theoria ’, ‘divine science’, or ‘King- dom of Heaven’, intermediate between ‘natural science’ and ‘divine theoria ’,  or ‘Kingdom of God’. 28 As the pagan philosophers saw the Platonic corpus as ‘higher’ than the Aristotelian, albeit broadly parallel to it, Sergius no doubt saw the Evagrian-Dionysian cursus as a ‘higher’ parallel to the Aristotelian.

Sergius therefore looks to be integrating the Aristotelian philosophy he acquired in Alexandria into a theological cursus which, if not designed solely for monks, was certainly particularly appropriate for them. It was his view, expressed towards the end of the Categories commentary, that without Aristotle’s logic not only medicine and philosophy cannot be understood, but neither ‘can the true sense be uncovered of the divine Scriptures, wherein lies the hope of our salvation 29 – unless it should be that someone receives divine ability thanks to the exalted nature of his way of life, with the result that he has no need for human instruction’. 30 He allows therefore that some who live an exalted way of life can do without ‘human instruction’, and it may be surmised from this that some could attain to the Evagrian-Dionysian theoria without the benefi t (or at any rate the full benefi t)  of the Aristotelian. This may help to explain the profi le of translation and com- mentary in Sergius’ œuvre : translation (or translation and adaptation) of Galen,  Dionysius, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and pseudo-Aristotelian De mundo , but no translation of, only commentary on, the (fi rst treatise of) Aristotle’s autoprosōpa . Even if the old anonymous Syriac version of the Categories existed at the time Sergius wrote his commentary, Sergius did not presuppose it in his exposition. 31 If his commentary was thus intended to facilitate philosophical study by Syrians, Aristotle himself had to be studied in Greek. A Syrian elite able to read Greek certainly existed, and they were perhaps quite numerous, 32 but in the other strand of Sergius’ ‘two strand curriculum’, the Scriptures, Evagrius, and Dionysius were  all available in Syriac, the last of them courtesy of none other than Sergius him- self. For Graeco-Syriac bilinguals he therefore provided a Syriac commentary  (completed or extant only on the Categories ) as an aid to understanding the Greek text of Aristotle; but for other Syrians, especially physicians and monks, whose way of life or divine aid gave them ‘some ability’ without the necessity of direct  access to the standard Aristotelian corpus, he provided some translations, princi- pally of Galen and Dionysius. These latter, monolingual Syrians might also, to  be sure, have been included in the intended readership of his commentaries, if he considered a derivative and simplifi ed knowledge of Aristotle to be of some value, though this would have differed radically from that of the students in Alexandria, who possessed both the Aristotelian text and the commentators’ expositions. The
