limitation of direct contact with the autoprosōpa to those able to read Greek was,  however, removed over time as the treatises of Aristotle were translated into Syr- iac during the next two or three centuries.

Sergius, however, was undoubtedly able to see that the obscurity with which, according to Ammonius, Aristotle veiled his teaching was analogous to that with which, according to Dionysius, the Scriptures veiled the divine mysteries. In explaining Aristotle’s obscurity he asserts, following Ammonius, that

> just as those celebrating any mysteries do not manifest them in front of everyone, but perform them in inner rooms and behind coverings so that they are known only to those who are partakers of the mysteries, so also he veiled the science of logic by the obscurity of the terms so that it would therefore not be disclosed to undisciplined and deceitful people, but to those whose mind is worthy of teaching such as this and who desire to labour with all their strength at fi ne (things) . . . those whose mind is brittle and whose will is inclined to laziness and who are eager in everything for corporeal pleasures would immediately become feeble and abstain from the knowledge of things, but those whose nature has kinship with knowledge and are ready for the teachings about everything not only do not become weak and give up when they see obscurity, but all the more strengthen their mind and devote themselves to great effort to get into the knowledge of what is said. 33

Sergius wrote this about the obscurity in which the teaching of Aristotle was  expressed, but he was well aware that analogous statements were made by Dio- nysius about the sacred, mystical teachings of the Scriptures. 34 Evagrius, too,  employed an intentional obscurity in the theological tradition of Origen and the Cappadocians. 35 Purity and ‘stretching of the mind’ were therefore necessary in  both strands of the curriculum. If the ‘instruments’ of the two strands may there- fore appear rather different but nevertheless have an inner coherence, the same  also applies to the ‘summits’. The problem of reconciling Aristotle’s Metaphysics  with Plato’s theology was already faced by the Alexandrians, who asked why Aris- totle called the fi rst principle Mind, while Plato called it the Good. The answer of  the later Neoplatonists was that Aristotle wrote the Metaphysics straight after the Physics , and for that reason spoke of Mind as closer to nature than the Good. They had no doubt that Aristotle’s fi rst principle was the One, and cited the Homeric quotation at the end of Metaphysics Λ: ‘let One be the ruler’. 36 If Sergius saw in his two-strand curriculum a similar problem between Dionysius and Aristotle’s  talk of Mind, his answer could naturally have been taken from Dionysius him- self: ‘Of course the mystical traditions of the revealing words sometimes hymn  the majesty of the supersubstantial thearchy as Word, Mind and Substance’. 37 He might also, however, have seen a solution in the same way as we see it solved by the later Neoplatonists: differences in terminology are to be explained in relation to the context of a treatise within the whole ‘ascending’ curriculum.
