## Between Sergius and Matta

Sergius was a physician and translated Galen. It is widely recognised therefore that philosophical studies, already closely associated with the medical in Greek late antiquity, made their entry into Syriac tradition in association with medicine, and this link is evident again in Baghdad in the Abbasid period and the activity of Ḥunayn. Sergius’ integration of Aristotelian studies with an ascetic-spiritual cursus enabled them also to become part of Syriac monastic tradition, at any rate of that segment of Syriac monastic tradition sympathetic to Greek philosophy. Zacharias’ Life of Severus gives us good grounds to suppose that the philosophical school at Alexandria attracted many who would subsequently enter monastic life, and that Sergius was only one of several drawn to the Greek schools of higher education from the Syriac-speaking area. 38 Within a number of Syriac monasteries there were those able to read Greek, notably in that of Qenneshre, originally the monastery of St. Thomas in the Greek Seleucia-on-Orontes and transferred from there around 530 to the banks of the Euphrates by John Bar Aphtonia, himself a  native of Edessa who probably wrote only in Greek. 39 Those who translated Aris- totle into Syriac clearly had access to Greek manuscripts, were able themselves  to study him through the medium of the Greek text, but for educational reasons – sometimes perhaps in connection with their own teaching – thought it valuable to  have a Syriac translation. To posit a ‘Syriac tradition’ of Aristotelian studies sepa- rate from the ‘Greek tradition’ between the sixth and ninth centuries 40 is therefore,  for the bilinguals, quite unrealistic. 41 The bilingual tradition of alumni from Syriac  monastic schools can be traced right through to the (trilingual) Catholicus Timo- thy I, who described Syriac as his own language but made clear that he had also  studied Greek and Arabic. 42

This bilingual tradition was keenly interested in both Aristotle and Dionysius, and the ongoing work of extending and ‘improving’ the Syriac translations of Aristotle (that is, by making them ever more closely mirror the Greek) by the scholars associated with Qenneshre seems to have proceeded alongside similar work on the Syriac version of Dionysius. Athanasius of Balad was, to the best  of our knowledge, the fi rst to carry the Syriac Organon as far as the Sophisti- cal Refutations , and he also produced a version of Dionysius (and Gregory of  Nazianzus). 43 It is very likely that Aristotle was read in Qenneshre together with  (at least some of the) Greek commentators who were used or who taught in Alex- andria. Jacob of Edessa’s revision of the old anonymous Syriac version of the  Categories appears to show evidence of having been produced or read in associ- ation with Greek commentaries, as indeed does the old version itself, 44 and there  is a (late) report that Jacob spent some time in Alexandria. 45 George, bishop of the Arabs, issued his translations of the Categories , De interpretatione , and Prior  Analytics together with commentaries which clearly are indebted to the Alexan- drian tradition. 46 There is no need to assume that the monastic school of Qenne- shre became a centre of Greek philosophical studies only in the seventh century  under the direction of Severus Sebokht; it is likely that it was already such in the
