sixth, and quite possibly even while it was still that of St. Thomas at Seleucia. Furthermore, a bilingual monastic school whose members were interested in both  Aristotle and Dionysius is likely to have been interested also in the writings, com- mentaries, and translations of Sergius. 47 We can trace a link from there to Bagh- dad, for Athanasius’ translations of both Aristotle and Dionysius were known to  Timothy, and (for Aristotle) also to the Syro-Arabic Baghdad Aristotelians who produced the Arabic ‘Paris Organon ’. 48 Timothy, furthermore, was aware of ‘the Commentary of Olympiodorus on the books of the logic, and of Stephanus and of Sergius and of Alexander’, 49 as well as translations of Dionysius by Athanasius and Phocas. 50 In his famous 1930 essay Max Meyerhof, on the dubious basis of  al-Fārābī’s ideologically motivated narrative, had the School of Alexandria relo- cating to Antioch and Ḥarrān on a peregrination to Baghdad. 51 He might have  been nearer the mark if in his time more had been known about the activities of the Qenneshre scholars and their infl uence, and of the migration of that monastery from the Orontes to the Euphrates. 52

Phocas’ preface to his translation of Dionysius affords a valuable insight into  this bilingual culture towards the end of the seventh century, as also into the infl u- ence of Sergius’ edition of Dionysius. Remarking on the writings of Dionysius,  interpreted long ago from Greek to Syriac by Sergius in a translation ‘which all of us, Syrians, have read’, he observes that there are obscure interpretations therein too elevated for the multitude, some of which he has omitted and some retained for the advantage of those who ‘like us have penetrated the knowledge of these interpretations’. ‘By divine providence’ Dionysius has come into his hands in the  original Greek with the scholia and preface of John of Scythopolis, and a pref- ace by George of Scythopolis. Phocas furthermore notes that many of the diffi cult  words have been researched in the manuals which comment on the Greek of the period and reported in the traditions of other workers such as Athanasius and Jacob of Edessa, who by their ability cleared the way as much as is possible and in some manner conjoined the two languages. 53 On the Aristotelian side, the translated works of the Qenneshre scholars were, as far as we know, limited to the Organon , but many of those able to read Greek, like Jacob of Edessa, also studied physics,  mathematics, and metaphysics. While among works on astronomy and the natu- ral sciences Syriac scholars of late antique and Umayyad times apparently trans- lated only some elementary treatises, many still had the capacity to read the more  advanced Greek writings in the original. 54 While the only known Syriac translation of Euclid probably comes from the early Abbasid period, 55 the seventh or eighth century undertext of a ninth century Syriac palimpsest copied at the monastery of Qartmin contains the Elements in Greek. 56 Apparently study not only of Greek, but of Greek geometry, was alive in that monastery in the seventh or eighth century, although no Syriac translation of Euclid is known from that time. Jacob of Edessa’s engagement with physics and metaphysics – all in association with his theological interests – is shown by his Hexaemeron and his Encheiridion .

The letters of Timothy are evidence that the study of the whole of the Organon , as also the Syriac translations of Athanasius, had reached Baghdad and the East
