were known to al-Kindī, a quite different picture emerges. Al-Kindī appears to have been seriously interested in only one of the organika (the Prior Analytics ) and two of the four ‘general’ physica ( De caelo and Meteorologica ), but almost all  the biological treatises (the Alexandrians’ biological ‘intermediate’ works) men- tioned by al-Fārābī.  73 It looks therefore as if al-Fārābī added to the curriculum he knew from Mattā’s school, which was essentially the Alexandrian curriculum, works which had been popular in al-Kindī’s circle. 74 Only in the case of Ibn Zur‘a do we fi nd evidence of any interest in the biological treatises on the part of a member of the school of Mattā.  75 Even allowing for the ‘asymmetrical’ nature of this evidence (the Fihrist on the one side and modern linguistic analysis on the other), it points fairly clearly to Mattā’s group, not al-Kindī’s, as the inheritors of the Alexandrian tradition. The Alexandrian curriculum of Aristotelian philosophy did not reach Mattā through al-Kindī.

The information in the Fihrist on the Greek commentators is also signifi cant. The Organon fell into two parts, each of four treatises: the logical method itself (the Posterior Analytics and its three necessary preliminaries, Categories to Prior Analytics ), and secondly the other four useful but less logically rigorous treatises ( Topics to Poetics ). There were numerous Greek commentaries on part one, many fewer on part two (as Timothy was aware). 76 It is when we come to those on the  physical treatises and the Metaphysics that three names stand out: Alexander, The- mistius, and Olympiodorus. 77 It looks as if these three were especially favoured  by Mattā, and it is unlikely that the signifi cant overlap with those mentioned by Timothy (died 823) a century or more earlier (Olympiodorus, Stephanus, Sergius,  and Alexander) 78 is purely coincidental. On the basis of this evidence it may there- fore be suggested that the heart (if not the totality) of the teaching in the School  of the Baghdad Aristotelians under Mattā’s direction consisted of the eight trea- tises of the Organon , the four treatises on physics, and the Metaphysics , together  with several of their Greek commentators, principally Alexander, Themistius, and Olympiodorus. 79 Since they did not know Greek, the Syro-Arabic teachers in Mattā’s school depended on Graeco-Syriac (or Graeco-Arabic) translations from the school of Ḥunayn or from earlier translators, but the identifi cation of most of these works for particular study within an Aristotelian curriculum was not due to Ḥunayn (809–876) or his son Isḥāq (died 911). They had been identifi ed, with the exception of the excluded physica , in the Hellenophile Syriac monastic schools, particularly Qenneshre, which maintained this modifi ed version of the curriculum taught in Alexandria. 80

Among the little that is extant from the writings of Mattā is the fragment already noted from his commentary on Metaphysics α.  81 We do have some trea- tises, however, from Yaḥyā ibn ‘Adī and Ibn Zur‘a, and in these we can observe  the continuing interest in Dionysius on the part of Syriac Christian Aristotelians. Yaḥyā’s treatise On the Unity draws both on Aristotle’s Metaphysics Δ 6 and on the Neoplatonic doctrine of the triad known in Proclus and Dionysius, who was probably one of the inspirations of Yaḥyā.  82 This is all the more likely in view of the fact that Yaḥyā’s pupil Ibn Zur‘a drew on Dionysius to answer why the
