Scriptures spoke of ‘Father, Son and Holy Spirit’ if the reality embedded in these expressions was the ‘Mind, Intelligizing and Thought’ of Aristotle’s Metaphysics Λ 9. The answer according to Ibn Zur‘a was not only that holy things should not be given to the dogs and pearls cast before swine ( Matthew 7, 6), but also, as explained by ‘the virtuous and excellent Dionysius’, that fi gurative expressions applied to divine things can push those who seek the truth to understand why these expressions have been employed. 83 While the idea that fi gurative expressions can ‘push those who seek the truth to understand’ is not unique to Dionysius, it is not without signifi cance that it was to Dionysius (among others) that Ibn Zur‘a  appealed when bringing together the teachings of Christian theology and Aris- totelian metaphysics. 84 Yaḥyā might not have been the fi rst Christian to connect  Metaphysics Λ 9 with the Trinity; the text was already interpreted theologically by Themistius. 85 While Neoplatonic theology joined with Aristotelian philosophy was domesticated in Islam by the Theology of Aristotle ,  86 for its domestication in  Christianity the basis was the corpus of Dionysius.

A modern analogy may serve to make clear the conclusion towards which this evidence is leading. It was not the hardware (the institution and its personnel) which migrated by stages from Alexandria to Baghdad, as al-Fārābī fantasised and Meyerhof believed, but the software (the curriculum). Beginning with Sergius, the original Alexandrian ‘program’ was ‘copied’ with various additions and modifi - cations over the years: the substitution of the Bible and Dionysius for Plato and pagan Neoplatonism, of Evagrian-monastic spirituality for the propaedeutic moral instruction (from Epictetus or Pseudo-Pythagoras) of the pagan philosophers, the gradual accumulation of Syriac versions and commentaries of Aristotle alongside the Greek and the Greeks, and the emphasis on the Organon (and to some degree the Metaphysics ) at the expense of the physical treatises (in the pre-Abbasid period). 87 The ‘hardware’ on which the successive revisions of this ‘program’ was run was the Syriac monastic schools, until it fi nally lost its Greek language component and acquired a new bilingual version in Syriac and Arabic. In Abbasid Baghdad the hardware for the new Syro-Arabic program was a multi-religious school, the teachers predominantly Christian, the students (and the surrounding environment) increasingly Muslim – somewhat mirroring the pagan teachers and growing body of Christian students and environment in Alexandria. In Alexandria Sergius broke from the Plato and Proclus of his pagan masters and linked Aristotle in the program with the Bible and Dionysius. Around four centuries later in Baghdad, al-Fārābī  broke from the Bible and Dionysius of his Christian masters and re-united the Cor- pus Aristotelicum with (whatever he knew of) Plato and Proclus.
