# HEGEL ON BEING 

Quality and the Birth of Quantity in Hegel's Science of Logic Volume 1 

## Stephen Houlgate

## IBSN: 9781-3501-8940-9

G.W.F. Hegel’s Science of Logic, fi rst published between 1812 and 1816, is one of the most profound works of philosophy ever written. It is a text of penetrating insight, extraordinary range and incomparable subtlety. Yet it is largely ignored by professional philosophers in the Anglo-American world (and not only there). Other works by Hegel, such as the Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Right, have become more widely studied on both sides of the Atlantic, but the Logic remains for the most part unread and unknown. Karl Popper famously poured scorn on what he called Hegel’s “mystery method” of “ dialectics” for embracing contradiction and so (allegedly) destroying “all argument and all progress” (Popper [1966], 2: 28, 39); and it appears that many Anglo-American philosophers have seen no good reason, and no need, to challenge such dismissive views of Hegelian logic. As a result, few have any understanding of the true philosophical signifi cance of Hegel’s Logic or, indeed, any idea what the book is actually about. Furthermore, the Logic is neglected, or actively disparaged, even by some experts on Hegel who are otherwise sympathetic to his thought. Allen Wood, for example, insists that “Hegel totally failed in his attempt to canonize speculative logic as the only proper form of philosophical thinking”, because “many of the philosophical paradoxes Hegel needs in order to make his system work are based on shallow sophistries” and “the resolution to paradoxes supplied by his system is often artifi cial and unilluminating” (Wood [1990], 4).

The aim of the present study is to explain in clear and accessible terms what Hegel is seeking to achieve in his Logic – in particular in its fi rst book, “the doctrine of being” – and to demonstrate that Hegel’s text, though formidably diffi cult, is full of profound and often challenging insights and very far from “unilluminating”. I have presented many aspects of my interpretation of the Logic in other essays and, especially, in The Opening of Hegel’s Logic (2006). The present study differs from the latter, however, in signifi cant respects.

Most importantly, it covers not just the fi rst two chapters of the section on quality (from “being” to true, “affi rmative infi nity”), as the earlier book does, but the whole of the doctrine of being. The present study thus provides a detailed account of all the categories of quality, quantity and measure, and explains how they are derived by Hegel from the initial category of pure being. In order to highlight the wide-ranging signifi cance of Hegel’s analyses, I also relate them to the thought of other philosophers, including Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Kant, Schelling and Frege. In particular, this study contains an extensive discussion of Hegel’s critique of Kant’s antinomies, and what is to my knowledge the most detailed comparison in English, and perhaps in any language, of Hegel and Frege. This material, together with my account of Hegel’s conception of differential calculus, is presented in chapters entitled “Excursus” to distinguish them from the chapters that actually take Hegel’s speculative logic forward. These excursuses draw on other chapters and are intended to be read as part of the study’s overall argument, but they can be read on their own. They can, however, also be skipped by readers wishing to focus principally on the logical development that Hegel describes, and returned to later.

All chapters have been written specially for the present study, but in some I discuss material that is also covered in The Opening of Hegel’s Logic. Some topics have been treated more concisely in this study than in The Opening, whereas topics discussed rather cursorily in the earlier book (such as Hegel’s critique of Kant) or neglected altogether (such as Hegel’s account of “absolute method” in the fi nal chapter of the Logic) have been given detailed treatment here. This new study is thus designed to complement and extend the analysis of the Logic given in The Opening, rather than replace it. This study does, however, include a discussion of Robert Pippin’s interpretation of Hegel that revises, and I hope improves on, the one presented in The Opening.

While working on this study, and in the years before, I have had the privilege of teaching Hegel’s Logic regularly at the MA level at Warwick and discussing it – often vigorously, but always fruitfully – with my PhD students. In particular, I would like to thank the following (former and current) research students for their inspiring energy, insight and companionship, without which writing this study would have been much harder and a lot less enjoyable: Ben Berger, Gene Flenady, Dino Jaku š i c ́ , James Kay, Richard Lambert, Filip Niklas, Ahilleas Rokni, Chris Russell-Smith, Jaideep Shah, Henry Somers-Hall, Ioannis Trisokkas, Lee Watkins, Graham Wetherall, Mert Yirmibes and Miao Zehao.

As will be clear from both The Opening of Hegel’s Logic and this study, my interpretation of the Logic is indebted in manifold ways to the work of other Hegel scholars. I should like to thank the following in particular for the encouragement, assistance and sometimes much needed challenges that they provided during the genesis of this study – possibly in ways of which they are unaware – both through their published work and through conversation: Michela Bordignon, Brady Bowman, Paolo Diego Bubbio, John Burbidge, Karin de Boer, Alfredo Ferrarin, Max Gottschlich, Dietmar Heidemann, Anton Friedrich Koch, Christian Martin, Angelica Nuzzo, Robert Pippin, Paul Redding, Friederike Schick, Sally Sedgwick, Sebastian Stein, Pirmin Stekeler, Robert Stern, Richard Winfi eld and Michael Wolff.

Much of this study was written while I was the recipient of a Leverhulme Major Research Fellowship from 2011 to 2014. I am enormously grateful to The Leverhulme Trust for supporting what must have seemed a deeply obscure project. This study would certainly not have seen the light of day without their extraordinary generosity. I am also very grateful to the University of Warwick for granting me research leave in 2018-19 to continue work on this study.

Heartfelt thanks are due, too, to my family. To my dear wife, Mary, for her loving support, unending patience and boundless good humour throughout this project. And to our children, Mark, Michael, Margaret and Christopher, to Sarah, Tom and Jenny, and to our wonderful grandchildren, Michael, Lily and Georgia, for constantly reminding me that there is a great world of joy to be found beyond the confi nes of Hegel’s Logic. I do not know whether Michael, Lily or Georgia will ever discover the profound wonders of Hegel’s Logic or if they will ever read Hegel on Being; but if they do decide to read some of the latter in later life, they can fi nally discover what Grandpa was actually doing when he said he was “working”.

## Kenilworth

## February 2021
# Categories, Language and Metaphysics

## The Role of Categories

Hegel’s Science of Logic is a dense and diffi cult work, but its aim is easily stated: to “clarify” or “purify” ( reinigen) the basic categories of thought (SL 17 / LS 17). It is tempting to think that simply opening our eyes confronts us with objects. In Hegel’s view, however, the matter is not that simple: opening our eyes merely lets in light and gives rise to visual sensations of colour. Strictly  speaking, therefore, we do not actually see objects before us; all we see is a two- dimensional “plane” ( Fl ä che) of colours. 1  So how do we come to experience objects? We do so, Hegel claims, by understanding what we see (and perceive through the other senses) in terms of general concepts or “categories” – a term he borrows from Aristotle and Kant (see LL 21, 34 / 25, 42). Such categories, for Hegel, include the thoughts of “something”, “quantity”, and “cause”. They make the experience of objects possible by enabling us to regard what we perceive as more than just an array of colours – as something, an object, that has a certain magnitude and exercises a causal infl uence on other things. 2

In Hegel’s view, therefore, objects are not simply given to us by the senses. We experience objects because, by means of categories, we understand what we see and hear to be an object. Such categories, Hegel contends, are not themselves the result of sensation but have their source in thought (though, as we shall see, their ultimate ground is the rationality in being itself). 3  Our experience of objects is thus the result of cooperation between sensation and thought. Hegel’s claim, however, is not that we fi rst have sensations and then bring categories to bear on them; rather, we understand and “categorize” what we see and hear as we see and hear it. 4  According to Hegel, therefore, we never have
unconceptualized sensations (at least when we are no longer very young children): we never see colours without understanding them to belong to some object, or to be something in their own right. In this sense, whenever we open our eyes, we do, indeed, “see” objects. Yet such “seeing” is not mere visual sensation, but the “concrete habit which immediately unites in one simple act the many determinations of sensation, consciousness, intuition, understanding, etc.” (EPM 132 / 186 [ §410 R]). 5

For Hegel, thought and its categories inform all our sensing and perceiving (and, indeed, our imagining and desiring). This, he claims, is what distinguishes human beings from other animals. 6  Non-human animals, we are told, remain immersed in unconceptualized sensations: they feel specifi c pleasures and pains and associate these with what they see, but they do not think of what they see as an object with qualities, magnitude, form and so on. 7  In the human being, by contrast, what Hegel calls “the logical” ( das Logische) – thought and its categories – “permeates all his natural behavior, his ways of sensing, intuiting, desiring, his needs and impulses; and it thereby makes them into something truly human” (SL 12 / LS 10). All human experience (beyond that of the very young) is thus mediated by categories. 8

Hegel notes that the categories or “forms of thought [ Denkformen] are fi rst set out and stored in human language” (SL 12 / LS 9-10). They are given implicit or explicit expression in words; or, as Hegel puts it in his philosophy of spirit, “it is in names that we think” (EPM 199 / 278 [ §462 R]). Categories thus inform and permeate our sensing and imagining insofar as language informs them. As Hegel writes,

> In all that becomes something inward for the human being, or a representation as such, in whatever he makes his own, language has penetrated, and everything that he transforms into language and expresses in it contains a category [ Kategorie], whether concealed, mixed, or well defi ned. So much is the logical natural to the human being, or rather it is his very nature itself. 

—SL 12 / LS 10

Language, however, is something we have to learn. Before we learn it, when we are still very young, we are thus immersed, much like non-human animals, in sensations that are as yet unconceptualized. Instead of experiencing identifi able objects, therefore, “initially the child has only a sensation of light by which things are manifest to it” (EPM 56 / 80 [ §396 A]). As we learn language, thought and its categories then gradually come to inform our whole consciousness; and, Hegel notes, explicit “instruction in grammar” also draws the attention of children to “distinctions of thought” (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). 9 In this way, although it is not initially true, it comes to be true of human beings that they never have unconceptualized sensations. 10
Moreover, as our command of language improves, so the range of categories that permeate our consciousness increases. Individuals at different stages of linguistic development will thus understand the world in subtly different ways. Hegel also believes that whole languages can give expression to basic categories to different degrees and may not express certain categories at all (at least before certain points in their history), so different peoples and civilisations can understand the world in subtly different ways, too. “It is to the advantage of a language”, Hegel writes, “when it possesses a wealth of logical expressions, that is, specifi c and separate expressions for the thought determinations themselves”, and in certain languages “many of the prepositions and articles already pertain to relations based on thought”; “the Chinese language”, however, “has apparently not developed to this stage at all, or only to an inadequate extent” (SL 12 / LS 10). Whether this supposition about Chinese is correct, I cannot say; but Hegel’s remark confi rms that, in his view, speakers of different languages can experience the world through different categories (or through the same categories conceived in different ways). 11

For Immanuel Kant, the twelve categories listed in the Critique of Pure Reason (1781, 2nd edn 1787) are the universal conditions of the objects of experience (though they must be “awakened into exercise” by experience itself) (see CPR B 1, 106, 195-7). For Hegel, by contrast, while the experience of objects necessarily presupposes categories, it does not presuppose that all people and peoples employ precisely the same ones or understand the ones they share in precisely the same way. Furthermore, Hegel thinks that in the course of history human beings can change the categories they employ. Indeed, he claims, “all revolutions, in the sciences no less than in world history, originate solely from the fact that spirit [ . . . ] has changed its categories, comprehending itself more truly, more deeply, more intimately, and more in unity with itself” (EN 11 / 20-1 [ §246 A]). As an example of what he has in mind, Hegel maintains in the Logic that in early nineteenth-century physics, “where the predominant category previously was that of force, it is the category of polarity that now plays the most signifi cant role” (SL 13 / LS 11). 12 In contrast to Kant, therefore, Hegel does not consider the categories of thought to be straightforwardly universal. He believes, rather, that “the advance of culture in general and of the sciences in particular [ . . . ] gradually fosters the rise of thought-relations [ Denkverh ä ltnisse] that are also more advanced, or it at least raises them to wider universality and consequently brings them to greater notice” (SL 13 / LS 11). 13

Categories, such as “force” and “polarity”, are understood by Hegel to belong principally, though not exclusively, to natural science. Many others, however, fi nd expression and employment primarily in everyday language. As noted above, for example, Hegel thinks that categories are expressed – at least implicitly – in certain languages by common “prepositions and articles”. (Later
we will see the important role that the prepositions in (in or within), an (in or at) and f ü r (for) play in Hegel’s own account of the categories of Insichsein  (being-within-self), Ansichsein (being-in-itself) and F ü rsichsein (being-for- self).) 14 Hegel also points out that categories are expressed in many languages  by everyday nouns and verbs. Indeed, he thinks that this is the more important way for categories to be expressed, for they are thereby made more explicit or “stamped into objective form” (SL 12 / LS 10). The category of being, for example, fi nds expression in the verb “to be”, in particular in the copula of sentences: as Hegel notes, “categories, like being, or singularity, are already mingled into every sentence, even when it has a completely sensuous content: ‘This leaf is green’ ” (EL 27 / 45 [ §3 R]).

Examples such as this show that categories are not just the preserve of philosophers and scientists, but inform everything we say in everyday life: they are, as Hegel puts it, “always on our lips” ( immer im Munde) (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). This is the case whatever language we speak, for all human consciousness is informed by categories, if not always in the same way. Categories are expressed in the words and sentences of all speakers of all languages.

Yet for the most part speakers are not aware that their words and sentences give expression to categories. Their employment of categories is thus largely unconscious and instinctive and constitutes a merely “natural logic” in human consciousness (SL 15-17, 19 / LS 14-17, 19). Since categories are, in the main, employed “instinctively”, we do not usually refl ect on them or consider whether we are employing them properly. Indeed, we are so familiar with the words in which they are expressed that we take them for granted without further ado: “ Being, for example, is a pure thought-determination; but it never occurs to us to make ‘is’ the subject matter of our inquiry” (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). 15 As a consequence, Hegel claims, most people do not have a clear understanding of the categories that inform and guide their consciousness. What is intimately “ familiar” ( bekannt) to us – the categories or the words that express them – is thus, for the most part, not something “ known” ( erkannt) (SL 13 / LS 11; see also PS 18 / 25.). Indeed, it is usually “what is most unknown” (or “unfamiliar”) ( das Unbekannteste) – what we are least conscious of and least disposed to think about. 16

In Hegel’s view, however, if we do not understand the categories properly, we are at their mercy and so, to a greater or lesser degree, unfree, or we risk exposing ourselves to “deception” ( T ä uschung). 17 For much of the time, the largely unconscious categories in our language help us navigate through everyday life successfully. Yet they can also lead us to misunderstand in various ways the very world they open up for us: for they can make us think, for example, that things are more independent of one another, or on the contrary more subject to external causation, than they are. We can see this deception, however, only when our categories have been conceived properly; and this,
Hegel contends, occurs in his science of logic. The aim of such logic is thus not to reveal an “Absolute” altogether beyond our experience, but to “clarify” (or “purify”), and so to prevent our being deceived by, the categories that are “always on our lips”. The task of Hegel’s logic is thereby also to raise us to greater freedom: for in such logic our thought is guided by the categories no longer just instinctively but “consciously” ( mit Bewu ß tsein), and so is what Hegel calls “intelligent and free activity” which “ knows itself” to be what it is (SL 17 / LS 16-17).

# Metaphysics, Empiricism and their Presuppositions

Hegel believes that in much other Western philosophy categories also guide thought with more than just “instinct”: they are consciously distinguished from other representations and then used to understand the world. He is particularly interested in the way they are employed in metaphysics before the latter is subjected to critique by Kant. In Hegel’s work the term “metaphysics” sometimes refers to the set of categories that informs any consciousness, whether philosophical or non-philosophical: “the diamond net into which everything is brought and thereby fi rst made intelligible” (EN 11 / 20 [ §246 A]). Yet it is also the name he attaches to a central strand of pre-Kantian philosophy in which categories are employed. In such philosophical “metaphysics” Hegel includes mediaeval Scholasticism, as well as the early modern rationalism of Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz (or, rather, core aspects of such rationalism) – though, in his view, the most developed, if not most insightful, form of metaphysics is found in the writings of Christian Wolff, who divided the subject into general metaphysics (or ontology) and special metaphysics (which encompasses cosmology, rational psychology and natural theology). 18

Since philosophy is a refl ective discipline, one might expect metaphysicians, such as Wolff, to consider explicitly how best to understand the categories of thought before employing them. Yet Hegel claims that in pre-Kantian metaphysics, as in everyday life, categories are employed without – or at least without adequate – consideration of whether they are being conceived properly (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]); this is in spite of the fact that they are used in metaphysics with a certain “consciousness”. For this reason, Hegel maintains, metaphysics “incurred the just reproach that it employed the pure forms of thought” – the categories – “ uncritically” ( ohne Kritik) (SL 42 / LS 50-1). Metaphysics sets itself apart from everyday, non-philosophical thinking by seeking a rational, systematic understanding of reality; from Hegel’s perspective, however, it is in fact an “uncritical thinking along [ unkritisches Dahindenken], of the kind that anyone can do” (EL 82 / 115 [ §41 A1]). Hegel does not deny that there is debate among metaphysicians about fundamental categories, such
as substance, and how they should best be understood. Yet he thinks that, despite such debate, many features of these categories – and, indeed, of thought as such – are taken for granted by metaphysics without question.

As Hegel understands it, pre-Kantian metaphysics seeks to comprehend what it takes to be objects of pure reason (rather than the senses), namely “the soul, the world, God” (EL 68 / 97 [ §30]). 19 It starts from a general conception or “representation” ( Vorstellung) of the latter and then endeavours to determine their nature more precisely through reason alone. Metaphysics carries out its self-appointed task by predicating categories of the objects of reason and so claiming, for example, that the world is “fi nite” or “infi nite” and that the soul is “simple” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]). Such claims may be supported by prior arguments or be the premises of further arguments themselves. Either way, in Hegel’s view, the metaphysical manner of thinking is uncritical, because in proceeding as it does it takes two related ideas for granted without further refl ection. It presupposes, fi rst, “that cognition of the Absolute could come about through attributing predicates to it” in judgements, and, second, that categories or concepts, such as “fi nite” and “infi nite”, or “simple” and “composite”, when taken as distinct from – indeed, in opposition to – one another, can themselves be understood as “ predicates of what is true”. That is to say, metaphysics takes it for granted that knowledge of objects of reason can be expressed in judgements in which distinct categories serve as predicates, and there was “no investigation of whether predicates of this kind are something true in and for themselves, nor of whether the form of the judgment could be the form of truth” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]). One may wonder how it is possible to think without making judgements about things; yet unless it can be shown why thought must involve judgement, the claim that it does so will remain a mere assumption. This is the case, in Hegel’s view, in pre-Kantian metaphysics.

Metaphysics also assumes that any judgement it makes, such as that the soul is simple or the world is fi nite, is either true or false. In the same vein it assumes that “of two opposed assertions [ . . . ] one must be true, and the other false” (EL 69 / 98 [ §32]); thus, if it is true that the world is fi nite, it is false that it is infi nite. This assumption rests on a further assumption about categories, namely that opposed categories are indeed simply opposed to one another. Metaphysicians may disagree about the exact meaning of the terms “fi nite” and “infi nite”, but, according to Hegel, they agree that being fi nite is the opposite of being infi nite, just as being simple is the opposite of being composite. It is for this reason that it must be false to say that the world is infi nite if it is true that it is fi nite. For metaphysics, therefore, the world is either one or the other; it cannot be both at the same time and in the same respect, because the two categories concerned exclude one another.

This conception of categories, and the “either / or” thinking that it grounds, is named by Hegel “ dogmatism”. Dogmatism, for him, thus consists, not just in
refusing to revise one’s judgements, but in taking opposed categories to be defi nitively opposed to one another (EL 69 / 98 [ §32]). Such dogmatism, in Hegel’s view, is characteristic of what (following Kant) he calls the “understanding” ( Verstand). “Thinking as understanding”, he maintains, “stops short at the fi xed [ fest] determinacy and its distinctness vis- à -vis other determinacies”; that is, it takes such “determinacies” or categories to stand over against their opposites and so, in each case, to constitute one side of an opposition (EL 125 / 169 [ §80]). It thus holds them to be essentially one-sided, fi nite determinations of thought, each of which begins only where its opposite stops. For the understanding, therefore, each category is simply what it is and is defi nitely not its opposite.

Understanding, in Hegel’s view, governs much of everyday life and, indeed, is essential to it, since it enables us to have “defi nite purposes”, to make clear decisions and to grasp objects in their “determinacy” (EL 126-7 / 170 [ §80 A]). Everyday life, however, is also permeated by an awareness of the dialectic through which opposites turn into one another (for example, in “familiar proverbs” such as “pride goes before a fall”) and of the “speculative” unity of opposites (for example, in religion). 20 Metaphysics, by contrast, is governed more thoroughly by understanding: it is “the way in which the mere understanding views the objects of reason” (EL 65 / 93 [ §27]). It takes what Hegel calls the “totalities” of the soul, world and God and understands them to be either simple or composite, either fi nite or infi nite, and so on (EL 68-9 / 97-8 [ § §30, 32]). Metaphysical understanding can, of course, attribute both opposing predicates to its object under a certain condition: it can judge the object to be fi nite in this respect and infi nite in that respect. Yet it must still judge these two respects to be opposed to one another, and so remains tied to oppositional “either / or” thinking even in this case.

Understanding assumes that opposed categories are simply opposed, because it assumes that each category simply is what it is and is not what it is not. That is to say, understanding is governed by the principle of identity: A is A. 21 The corollary of this principle is the principle of contradiction (or non-contradiction): A is not not-A (see SL 18 / LS 18). These two principles thus constitute the founding assumptions of pre-Kantian metaphysics, as Hegel understands it. They are mere assumptions because metaphysics is unable to prove them but simply takes them for granted. In Hegel’s view, proving these principles would require demonstrating their necessity by deriving them from the very nature of thought; metaphysics, however, provides no such derivation. 22

Christian Wolff, whom Hegel regards as the quintessential metaphysician, tries to avoid just taking the principle of non-contradiction for granted, and he does so (paradoxically for a rationalist) by basing the principle on experience. As he writes in his First Philosophy or Ontology (1730), “we experience this as the nature of our mind: that while it judges that something is, it cannot judge
at the same time that the same thing is not”. He goes on to insist that this experience is “evident” ( obvia) to anyone who is conscious of himself; indeed, he claims, anyone who does not see this will be counted among the mad or the intentionally foolish “with whom we have nothing to do” (a sentiment echoed just over a century and a half later by Frege). 23 As Hegel reminds us, however, both Hume and Kant argue that experience cannot show the necessity of any principle or concept (see EL 80-1 / 111-13 [ § §39-40]). Wolff’s attempt to avoid taking the principle of non-contradiction for granted thus brings him no closer to proving the principle. All he can do is assert, insist, and so ultimately assume as self-evident, that we cannot judge something to be A and not to be A at the same time and in the same respect.

The principle of non-contradiction seems so obvious that it is hard to see how one could think without it. According to Hegel, however, it is never proven or derived by metaphysics, but is simply taken for granted “uncritically”. Furthermore, there is a problem with the principle, of which metaphysicians for the most part are not fully aware, namely that thinking in conformity with it actually produces the very contradiction it is meant to hold at bay. The easiest way to see what Hegel has in mind is to consider the categories of the fi nite and the infi nite.

If we consider these categories according to the principle of non- contradiction, then the fi nite is clearly not the infi nite and the infi nite is not the  fi nite. To be fi nite, as the term implies, is to come to an end, to have a limit and at that limit to stop being what one is; to be infi nite is thus to have no end or limit. The problem, however, is this: if the fi nite is not the infi nite and the infi nite is not the fi nite, then the infi nite has its own limit and stops being what it is at the point at which the fi nite starts. This then turns the infi nite itself into something fi nite and so violates the principle of non-contradiction, according to which A is defi nitely not not-A, is not its own negation. In Hegel’s (reported) words: “here infi nity is sharply contrasted with fi nitude, yet it is easy to see that if the two are set against one another, then infi nity [ . . . ] is limited by the fi nite. But a limited infi nity is itself only something fi nite”. 24

The process through which a category such as infi nity turns into its opposite  is called by Hegel “dialectic”. “The dialectical moment”, he writes, “is the self- sublation [ Sichaufheben] of these fi nite determinations on their own part, and  their passing into their opposites” (EL 128 / 172 [ §81]). We shall learn more about such dialectic later when we examine Hegel’s Logic in detail, and we shall see that it is generated, ultimately, by the categories of thought themselves, rather than the way in which we conceive them (see SL 33 / LS 39). At this point, however, it is important to note that a dialectic is also generated by our understanding and its principle of non-contradiction: for the transition of the category of infi nity into its opposite is brought about by thinking of it as opposed to fi nitude in the fi rst place. This dialectic is thus not imposed on the
understanding from the outside, but belongs to, though is mostly unknown to, understanding itself. (One philosopher who is aware of this dialectic, in Hegel’s view, is Plato: for, in the Parmenides dialogue and elsewhere, Plato aims specifi cally “at dissolving and refuting limited assertions through themselves” [SL 34-5 / LS 40].) 25

As we shall see, Hegel not only demonstrates in his logic that categories pass into one another dialectically – of their own accord – but he also shows that, and how, they are to be thought together as a unity. This, he says, is the “speculative” moment in philosophical thought. Speculative thought, for Hegel, does not “speculate” in the ordinary sense: it does not put forward daring theses about the world that have no proper foundation. Rather, “the speculative or positively rational apprehends the unity of the determinations in their opposition, the affi rmative that is contained in their dissolution and in their transition”. 26 When we turn to examine Hegel’s derivation of specifi c categories, we shall see in more detail exactly what he understands the “speculative” unity  of opposites to entail. We should note here, however, that he thinks many pre- Kantian philosophers – starting with Heraclitus – have shared his speculative  insight into the “unity of opposed determinations” (LHP 2: 73-4 / VGP 2: 71- 2). Not all philosophy before Kant, therefore, can be equated with metaphysics, as Hegel conceives it, that is, with the philosophy of “ mere understanding” (EL 65 / 93 [ §27]).

In Hegel’s view, Plato and Aristotle were the fi rst to make the “forms of thought” the explicit “object of consideration for themselves”, and Aristotle in particular deserves praise for having “pinpointed [ fi xiert] these forms, this fi ne thread permeating all”, and having “brought this to consciousness” in his works on logic. 27 In doing so, however, Aristotle remained fi rmly within the limits of  the understanding, which is governed by the principles of identity and non- contradiction, and he thereby laid the foundation for subsequent formal logic  (and metaphysics) (LHP 2: 260-1 / VGP 3: 96-7). At the same time, Hegel insists, Aristotle’s thinking about the natural world and the human soul did not proceed in strict accordance with these principles of the understanding, but “he treated speculatively everything he observed” (LL 4 / 6). Aristotelian “virtue”, for example, consists in the “unity of the rational side with the irrational side” of the soul, that is, in the unity of reason and inclination (LHP 2: 255 / VGP 3: 92); his conception of nous as the unity of thinking and what is thinkable is “what is absolutely speculative” (LHP 2: 254 / VGP 3: 91); and, as we shall see (1: 363), Hegel attributes to Aristotle “truly speculative concepts of space, time, and motion” (SL 164 / LS 208). Like Plato the dialectician, therefore, Aristotle is not to be regarded as a straightforwardly metaphysical philosopher, “although people usually believe the contrary” (EL 76 / 106 [ §36 A]).

The same can be said, Hegel maintains, of Spinoza: his thought also combines metaphysical with speculative elements. Spinoza is clearly a metaphysical
thinker in Hegel’s sense, insofar as he distinguishes sharply between being and non-being (and so follows Parmenides) (see SL 61, 71 / LS 74, 87). As Spinoza writes in the Ethics (1677), God is substance that is “absolutely infi nite”, and “if something is absolutely infi nite, whatever expresses essence and involves no negation pertains to its essence”. Substance is in turn being that is “conceived through itself”; so God, for Spinoza, is being without negation. 28 Furthermore, Spinoza draws a clear distinction between being and negation in the case of fi nite things, too. In his view, the fi nite, as fi nite, is subject to negation, insofar as it is (or can be) limited by something else of the same nature; 29 yet he insists that the being or essence of such things is itself free of negation.

First, Spinoza declares that the fi gure, or manner of “determination”, of fi nite bodies is a “negation and not anything positive” – that “determination is negation” – and he concludes that this determination “therefore does not pertain to the thing in regard to its being”. The fi gure or determinacy of a thing, and with it negation, are thereby kept apart from the thing’s being. 30 Second, Spinoza maintains that there is nothing in the defi nition of a fi nite thing that could cause it not to be. As he writes, “the defi nition of any thing affi rms, and does not deny, the thing’s essence”; the essence is itself that through which the thing is what it is; the defi nition thus affi rms what it is to be the thing and contains nothing that would negate or “deny” that being. Accordingly, while we attend only to the thing itself and its essence, “we shall not be able to fi nd anything in it which can destroy it”, which means in turn that a fi nite thing can only be deprived of being or existence by something else. 31

In separating being and negation in these ways, Spinoza proves himself to be a metaphysician in Hegel’s sense, namely a thinker wedded to the oppositions of the understanding and the principle of identity (see SL 61 / LS 74). In other respects, however, Spinoza strikes Hegel as a speculative, rather than a metaphysical, thinker. Hegel draws attention in particular to Spinoza’s concept of “causa sui” or cause-of-itself, in which the usual opposition between “cause” and “effect” is overcome. 32 This concept, Hegel maintains, “is a wholly speculative concept”, and he explains why this is as follows:

> A cause produces an effect that is something other than the cause. A cause of itself is a cause that produces an effect, but in this case the distinction is sublated [ aufgehoben], for a cause of itself produces only itself. This is a fundamental concept in all that is speculative – return into self in the other.

—LHP 3: 122-3 / VGP 4: 106, emphasis added

The concept of cause does not emerge in Hegel’s Logic until the doctrine of essence, and so is not one we will consider in this study. We will thus not be able to determine just how speculative in the fi nal analysis Hegel takes Spinoza’s thought to be. We have seen enough, however, to know that, although Spinoza

falls within the period of pre-Kantian metaphysics, he is not a pure metaphysician in Hegel’s eyes.

Indeed, when one examines Hegel’s remarks about early modern philosophy as a whole in his lectures on the history of philosophy, it appears that he takes only Christian Wolff (among the rationalists) to be a purely metaphysical philosopher. Wolff’s philosophy, Hegel contends, is “in general a philosophy of the understanding [ Verstandesphilosophie] as extended to all objects that fall within the realm of knowledge” (LHP 3: 157 / VGP 4: 138). It systematizes Leibniz’s thought, aspects of which Hegel praises, yet it does so in such a way “that in it the speculative has completely disappeared” (VGPW 3: 258). 33 For Hegel, therefore, all we fi nd in Wolff’s theoretical writings is “the dogmatism of the metaphysics of the understanding” in which “the absolute and rational is determined through mutually exclusive determinations and relations of the understanding, such as one and many, or simplicity and composition, fi nite and infi nite, the causal relation, and so on” (VGPW 3: 260). Whether these last lines provide an accurate picture of Wolff’s thought I leave to others to judge.  It is clear, however, that they give an accurate picture of “uncritical” pre- Kantian metaphysics, as Hegel conceives of it. 34

In contrast to such metaphysics, in Hegel’s view, empiricism does not begin with logical defi nitions of concepts and then justify its judgements through rational deduction (in the manner of Spinoza and Wolff), but it bases knowledge on sensuous experience. 35 For an empiricist, such as Locke, Hegel claims, knowledge arises solely through “elevat[ing] the content that belongs to perception, feeling, and intuition into the form of universal notions, principles, and laws, etc.” (EL 77 / 108 [ §38]). These principles and laws are thus not innate, or the products of pure reason or understanding, but they are derived from and justifi ed by empirical experience alone. Hegel maintains, however, that there is a “fundamental deception” ( Grundt ä uschung) in such empiricism: for, in the very process of giving an empirical account of knowledge and the world, it presupposes, and makes surreptitious use of, “the metaphysical categories of matter, force, as well as those of one, many, universality, and the infi nite, etc., and it goes on to draw conclusions, guided by categories of this sort, presupposing and applying the forms of syllogising in the process” (EL 77-8 / 108 [ §38 R]). 36 Locke, for example, presupposes the metaphysical concept of “simplicity” – employed by both Descartes and Leibniz – in his account of the empirical, sensuous origin of what he calls our “ideas”: for he claims that such ideas “enter by the Senses simple and unmixed”, even though, by his own admission, “Sight and Touch often take in from the same Object, at the same time, different Ideas”. 37 In this respect, Hegel contends, empiricism remains deeply mired in the metaphysics it opposes (see EL 77-8 / 108-9 [ §38 R]).

David Hume later radicalizes empiricism by observing – “correctly”, in Hegel’s view – that sense perception can provide no warrant for the thought of
a universal and necessary connection, that is, for the principle or category of causality (and the judgements in which the latter is employed) (EL 80 / 111 [ § 39]). 38 For Hume, we see this happen and then that, but “we perceive neither cause nor effect” (LL 29 / 36). In this sense, Hume has a more sceptical attitude towards a category that is central to metaphysics – causality – than does Locke, who claims without hesitation that qualities in things “affect” our sense organs and thereby produce ideas in us through their “Powers”. 39

Yet, for Hegel, Hume is still wedded to metaphysics, since he “leaves thinking” – as opposed to perception – “with abstraction only, with formal universality and identity” (EL 77 / 108 [ §38 R]). In his Inquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748) Hume famously distinguishes “Matters of Fact”, which are based on “the present testimony of our senses or the records of our memory”, from “Relations of Ideas”, which concern quantity and number and are “discoverable by the mere operation of thought”. Such relations, he tells us, consist in the “equality or inequality” between the parts of quantity and number, and so rest, ultimately, on the principles of identity and non-contradiction. 40 Hume is thus by no means as sceptical of metaphysics as he could be: for, though he professes to be a consistent empiricist, his conception of thought coincides in important ways with that of the arch-metaphysician, Christian Wolff.

According to Hegel, therefore, empiricism is more closely tied to metaphysical thinking than its advocates realize. It proceeds “without knowing that it thereby itself contains metaphysics and is engaged in it, and that it is using those categories and their connections in a totally uncritical and unconscious manner” (EL 78 / 109 [ §38 R]). In the preface to the second edition of the Logic Hegel levels a similar charge against those who are critical of his own speculative philosophy. He does not there address specifi c arguments of his opponents, but he objects to the fact that “their opinions and objections contain categories which are presuppositions and themselves in need of being criticized fi rst before they are put to use” (SL 20 / LS 20-1).

Such presuppositions, Hegel tells us, include the assertions that “infi nity is different from fi nitude, content something else than form, the inner something else than the outer, likewise that mediation is not immediacy” (SL 21 / LS 21- 2). His critics thus accuse him of failing to respect what they take to be fundamental distinctions and oppositions between categories. Note, however, that Hegel does not criticize his critics in turn just for making such distinctions; we will see further on that the latter are not erased by speculative philosophy, but are preserved – albeit in a qualifi ed form – in the very idea of the “unity of opposites”. 41 His criticism of his critics is that they simply assume such distinctions to be defi nitive, in an unrefl ective and uncritical manner, and do not take the trouble to discover whether they are defi nitive. His critics fail to see that it is illegitimate simply “to presuppose and straight away accept” such
distinctions, and that “the requirement and the business of logical thinking is to investigate precisely whether such a fi nite without infi nity is something true” (SL 21 / LS 22). Hegel makes a similar criticism of everyday consciousness and of metaphysics. The former uses categories unconsciously and instinctively, whereas the latter employs them consciously to comprehend the objects of reason (and is tied more closely to understanding than is everyday consciousness [see 1: 9]); but both take their categories for granted uncritically without further ado. 42

In Hegel’s view, such uncritical taking-for-granted is problematic because it confl icts with Kant’s insistence at the end of the eighteenth century on the need for a critique of reason, and also with the principle of freedom that informs modern philosophy and the modern age more generally. 43 This latter principle, we are told, has its source in the Reformation and implicitly underlies the thought of the founder of modern philosophy, Ren éDescartes. In the modern period, Hegel maintains, “what has to be acknowledged is thinking freely on its own account, and this can happen only through my thinking freely within myself”. Accordingly, human beings must now scrutinize their thought and set aside whatever rests on “sheer authority” rather than freedom, including the authority of the understanding and of mere assumption as such. In philosophy, therefore, as Hegel puts it, “we must renounce every presupposition and prejudice”, “since every presupposition is something found already there that thinking has not posited” (LHP 3: 104, 108-9 / VGP 4: 88, 92-3). This directive, of course, is the principle that guides Descartes; for Hegel, Descartes’ insistence that we must doubt and set aside all our assumptions is thus a clear expression of modern freedom, even though he does not explicitly emphasize freedom in his work (LHP 3: 109 / VPG 4: 93). 44

Hegel notes, however, that Descartes does not adhere consistently to this principle but makes assumptions of his own. At one point in the Principles of Philosophy (1644), for example, Descartes turns to consider “ substance, duration, order”, but, in Hegel’s view, the defi nitions he provides of them are simply those he fi nds – that is, assumes – to be true. As Hegel puts it, therefore, Descartes “lays down as the basic principle that nothing must be assumed”, but “the differentiated content or the representations to which he passes on at this point he still takes up as something found [ ein Gefundenes] within our consciousness” (LHP 3: 114 / VGP 4: 98). 45 There are also unexplained assumptions in the Meditations (1641). In the third Meditation, for example, Descartes asserts that “there must be at least as much reality in the effi cient and total cause as in the effect of that cause”, while telling us only that “it is manifest by the natural light” that this is so; 46 and in the second Meditation, Descartes asserts that I am “a thing that thinks” without explaining why thought should be attached to a “thing” at all. Indeed, Hegel suggests that one could even omit the “I” from thought and be left with “only thinking and being”, in which case
Descartes’ argument, “I think, therefore I am”, would be reduced to the much simpler “thinking, therefore ‘is’ ” (or “ thought, therefore being ”) – an argument that Hegel himself relies on to show that speculative logic must be ontology. 47

From a Hegelian perspective, therefore, much of Descartes’ philosophy is at odds with the modern principle, which he endorses, that “one must make no presupposition” (LHP 3: 109 / VGP 4: 92). So, too, is the uncritical assumption made by other pre-Kantian metaphysicians and empiricists (and by Hegel’s own critics) that categories should be conceived as the understanding conceives of them. Accordingly, Hegel believes, the principle of modern freedom requires us to abandon this assumption and consider anew how the categories should be conceived. Indeed, it requires us to abandon all determinate assumptions about thought and to undertake a study of the categories that is altogether presuppositionless. 48

The task of Hegel’s Logic will be to undertake precisely this study. It will be a critical study because it will not assume in advance that we already know how categories are to be understood. In particular, it will not presuppose that opposed categories are – or are not – defi nitively opposed, but it will seek to discover whether “a fi nite without infi nity is something true; likewise, whether such an abstracted infi nity, or whether a content without form or a form without content, an inner by itself that has no expression, an externality without inwardness, whether any of this is something true or something actual” (SL 21 / LS 22). Indeed, Hegel’s study may not assume from the outset that specifi c categories belong to thought at all, but it must start from the sheer indeterminate being of thought – the simple “is” of thinking – and seek to discover whether any categories belong to it. Those categories that do emerge in the course of Hegel’s speculative logic will thus not just have been taken for granted, but will have been derived from, and so shown to be inherent in and made necessary by, thought itself. In Hegel’s view, this process of deriving categories, without presupposing their form or content at the start, will also show how they are to be conceived in truth (and thereby “clarify” or “purify” them). It will thus disclose whether categorial “predicates” of the kind employed by metaphysics “are something true in and for themselves” and, in so doing, “whether the form of the judgment could be the form of truth” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 R]). 49

Note, by the way, that the fact that certain categories prove, in speculative logic, to be inherent in thought, and so necessary, does not mean that they should therefore all be equally explicit in the thought of every individual and people. As we shall see, such logic discloses the necessary categories of thought by rendering explicit what is implicit in thought, and in so doing it shows that these categories are themselves merely implicit at fi rst. 50 This means, of course, that they are merely implicit at fi rst in logic; but this idea is not incompatible with the idea that they are merely implicit at fi rst in history and in the consciousness of individuals, too. Categories can thus prove in logic to be
inherent in thought and yet still be merely implicit in, or indeed absent from, the thought of certain historical peoples and of children in the early stages of learning language; and they can also be expressed more explicitly, yet be employed only “instinctively and unconsciously”, by ordinary, everyday consciousness (SL 19 / LS 19).

The project of Hegel’s logic – to discover anew and without prior assumptions which categories, if any, are inherent in thought – does not, therefore, render unintelligible in history and everyday life the merely implicit presence, or the absence, or the merely instinctive employment of such categories. Indeed, a major task of such logic, as Hegel conceives it, is precisely to provide a thorough, non-question-begging derivation and clarifi cation of the categories that are employed instinctively, and without a clear grasp of their proper form and content, by everyday consciousness. “As impulses”, Hegel writes, “the categories do their work only instinctively; they are brought to consciousness one by one and so are variable and mutually confusing, thus affording to spirit only fragmentary and uncertain actuality”, and so, as noted above, they can deceive us about the very world they open up (see 1: 6). “To purify [ reinigen] these categories and in them to elevate spirit [ Geist] to freedom and truth, this is therefore the loftier business of logic” (SL 17 / LS 17). At the same time Hegel’s logic will “reconstruct” the categories and forms of reasoning that have been employed consciously by metaphysics and analysed in formal logic (SL 19 / LS 19). It will thus provide a new and presuppositionless conception of the categories and forms of reasoning whose character both ordinary consciousness and metaphysics have previously just taken for granted.

Karl Popper suspects Hegel of trying to “destroy all argument and all progress” through the “mystery method” of “ dialectics”. 51 Hegel’s real aim in the Logic is, however, far less sinister than Popper would have us believe. It is to undertake a thoroughly critical and open-minded study of thought, and thereby to bring us to an “educated cognition of the thought-relationships”, or categories, that permeate to varying degrees, and often unconsciously, all human experience, understanding and reasoning (EL 11 / 23 [Preface to 2nd edn]). 52
