at the same time that the same thing is not”. He goes on to insist that this experience is “evident” ( obvia) to anyone who is conscious of himself; indeed, he claims, anyone who does not see this will be counted among the mad or the intentionally foolish “with whom we have nothing to do” (a sentiment echoed just over a century and a half later by Frege). 23 As Hegel reminds us, however, both Hume and Kant argue that experience cannot show the necessity of any principle or concept (see EL 80-1 / 111-13 [ § §39-40]). Wolff’s attempt to avoid taking the principle of non-contradiction for granted thus brings him no closer to proving the principle. All he can do is assert, insist, and so ultimately assume as self-evident, that we cannot judge something to be A and not to be A at the same time and in the same respect.

The principle of non-contradiction seems so obvious that it is hard to see how one could think without it. According to Hegel, however, it is never proven or derived by metaphysics, but is simply taken for granted “uncritically”. Furthermore, there is a problem with the principle, of which metaphysicians for the most part are not fully aware, namely that thinking in conformity with it actually produces the very contradiction it is meant to hold at bay. The easiest way to see what Hegel has in mind is to consider the categories of the fi nite and the infi nite.

If we consider these categories according to the principle of non- contradiction, then the fi nite is clearly not the infi nite and the infi nite is not the  fi nite. To be fi nite, as the term implies, is to come to an end, to have a limit and at that limit to stop being what one is; to be infi nite is thus to have no end or limit. The problem, however, is this: if the fi nite is not the infi nite and the infi nite is not the fi nite, then the infi nite has its own limit and stops being what it is at the point at which the fi nite starts. This then turns the infi nite itself into something fi nite and so violates the principle of non-contradiction, according to which A is defi nitely not not-A, is not its own negation. In Hegel’s (reported) words: “here infi nity is sharply contrasted with fi nitude, yet it is easy to see that if the two are set against one another, then infi nity [ . . . ] is limited by the fi nite. But a limited infi nity is itself only something fi nite”. 24

The process through which a category such as infi nity turns into its opposite  is called by Hegel “dialectic”. “The dialectical moment”, he writes, “is the self- sublation [ Sichaufheben] of these fi nite determinations on their own part, and  their passing into their opposites” (EL 128 / 172 [ §81]). We shall learn more about such dialectic later when we examine Hegel’s Logic in detail, and we shall see that it is generated, ultimately, by the categories of thought themselves, rather than the way in which we conceive them (see SL 33 / LS 39). At this point, however, it is important to note that a dialectic is also generated by our understanding and its principle of non-contradiction: for the transition of the category of infi nity into its opposite is brought about by thinking of it as opposed to fi nitude in the fi rst place. This dialectic is thus not imposed on the
