understanding from the outside, but belongs to, though is mostly unknown to, understanding itself. (One philosopher who is aware of this dialectic, in Hegel’s view, is Plato: for, in the Parmenides dialogue and elsewhere, Plato aims specifi cally “at dissolving and refuting limited assertions through themselves” [SL 34-5 / LS 40].) 25

As we shall see, Hegel not only demonstrates in his logic that categories pass into one another dialectically – of their own accord – but he also shows that, and how, they are to be thought together as a unity. This, he says, is the “speculative” moment in philosophical thought. Speculative thought, for Hegel, does not “speculate” in the ordinary sense: it does not put forward daring theses about the world that have no proper foundation. Rather, “the speculative or positively rational apprehends the unity of the determinations in their opposition, the affi rmative that is contained in their dissolution and in their transition”. 26 When we turn to examine Hegel’s derivation of specifi c categories, we shall see in more detail exactly what he understands the “speculative” unity  of opposites to entail. We should note here, however, that he thinks many pre- Kantian philosophers – starting with Heraclitus – have shared his speculative  insight into the “unity of opposed determinations” (LHP 2: 73-4 / VGP 2: 71- 2). Not all philosophy before Kant, therefore, can be equated with metaphysics, as Hegel conceives it, that is, with the philosophy of “ mere understanding” (EL 65 / 93 [ §27]).

In Hegel’s view, Plato and Aristotle were the fi rst to make the “forms of thought” the explicit “object of consideration for themselves”, and Aristotle in particular deserves praise for having “pinpointed [ fi xiert] these forms, this fi ne thread permeating all”, and having “brought this to consciousness” in his works on logic. 27 In doing so, however, Aristotle remained fi rmly within the limits of  the understanding, which is governed by the principles of identity and non- contradiction, and he thereby laid the foundation for subsequent formal logic  (and metaphysics) (LHP 2: 260-1 / VGP 3: 96-7). At the same time, Hegel insists, Aristotle’s thinking about the natural world and the human soul did not proceed in strict accordance with these principles of the understanding, but “he treated speculatively everything he observed” (LL 4 / 6). Aristotelian “virtue”, for example, consists in the “unity of the rational side with the irrational side” of the soul, that is, in the unity of reason and inclination (LHP 2: 255 / VGP 3: 92); his conception of nous as the unity of thinking and what is thinkable is “what is absolutely speculative” (LHP 2: 254 / VGP 3: 91); and, as we shall see (1: 363), Hegel attributes to Aristotle “truly speculative concepts of space, time, and motion” (SL 164 / LS 208). Like Plato the dialectician, therefore, Aristotle is not to be regarded as a straightforwardly metaphysical philosopher, “although people usually believe the contrary” (EL 76 / 106 [ §36 A]).

The same can be said, Hegel maintains, of Spinoza: his thought also combines metaphysical with speculative elements. Spinoza is clearly a metaphysical
