thinker in Hegel’s sense, insofar as he distinguishes sharply between being and non-being (and so follows Parmenides) (see SL 61, 71 / LS 74, 87). As Spinoza writes in the Ethics (1677), God is substance that is “absolutely infi nite”, and “if something is absolutely infi nite, whatever expresses essence and involves no negation pertains to its essence”. Substance is in turn being that is “conceived through itself”; so God, for Spinoza, is being without negation. 28 Furthermore, Spinoza draws a clear distinction between being and negation in the case of fi nite things, too. In his view, the fi nite, as fi nite, is subject to negation, insofar as it is (or can be) limited by something else of the same nature; 29 yet he insists that the being or essence of such things is itself free of negation.

First, Spinoza declares that the fi gure, or manner of “determination”, of fi nite bodies is a “negation and not anything positive” – that “determination is negation” – and he concludes that this determination “therefore does not pertain to the thing in regard to its being”. The fi gure or determinacy of a thing, and with it negation, are thereby kept apart from the thing’s being. 30 Second, Spinoza maintains that there is nothing in the defi nition of a fi nite thing that could cause it not to be. As he writes, “the defi nition of any thing affi rms, and does not deny, the thing’s essence”; the essence is itself that through which the thing is what it is; the defi nition thus affi rms what it is to be the thing and contains nothing that would negate or “deny” that being. Accordingly, while we attend only to the thing itself and its essence, “we shall not be able to fi nd anything in it which can destroy it”, which means in turn that a fi nite thing can only be deprived of being or existence by something else. 31

In separating being and negation in these ways, Spinoza proves himself to be a metaphysician in Hegel’s sense, namely a thinker wedded to the oppositions of the understanding and the principle of identity (see SL 61 / LS 74). In other respects, however, Spinoza strikes Hegel as a speculative, rather than a metaphysical, thinker. Hegel draws attention in particular to Spinoza’s concept of “causa sui” or cause-of-itself, in which the usual opposition between “cause” and “effect” is overcome. 32 This concept, Hegel maintains, “is a wholly speculative concept”, and he explains why this is as follows:

> A cause produces an effect that is something other than the cause. A cause of itself is a cause that produces an effect, but in this case the distinction is sublated [ aufgehoben], for a cause of itself produces only itself. This is a fundamental concept in all that is speculative – return into self in the other.

—LHP 3: 122-3 / VGP 4: 106, emphasis added

The concept of cause does not emerge in Hegel’s Logic until the doctrine of essence, and so is not one we will consider in this study. We will thus not be able to determine just how speculative in the fi nal analysis Hegel takes Spinoza’s thought to be. We have seen enough, however, to know that, although Spinoza

