falls within the period of pre-Kantian metaphysics, he is not a pure metaphysician in Hegel’s eyes.

Indeed, when one examines Hegel’s remarks about early modern philosophy as a whole in his lectures on the history of philosophy, it appears that he takes only Christian Wolff (among the rationalists) to be a purely metaphysical philosopher. Wolff’s philosophy, Hegel contends, is “in general a philosophy of the understanding [ Verstandesphilosophie] as extended to all objects that fall within the realm of knowledge” (LHP 3: 157 / VGP 4: 138). It systematizes Leibniz’s thought, aspects of which Hegel praises, yet it does so in such a way “that in it the speculative has completely disappeared” (VGPW 3: 258). 33 For Hegel, therefore, all we fi nd in Wolff’s theoretical writings is “the dogmatism of the metaphysics of the understanding” in which “the absolute and rational is determined through mutually exclusive determinations and relations of the understanding, such as one and many, or simplicity and composition, fi nite and infi nite, the causal relation, and so on” (VGPW 3: 260). Whether these last lines provide an accurate picture of Wolff’s thought I leave to others to judge.  It is clear, however, that they give an accurate picture of “uncritical” pre- Kantian metaphysics, as Hegel conceives of it. 34

In contrast to such metaphysics, in Hegel’s view, empiricism does not begin with logical defi nitions of concepts and then justify its judgements through rational deduction (in the manner of Spinoza and Wolff), but it bases knowledge on sensuous experience. 35 For an empiricist, such as Locke, Hegel claims, knowledge arises solely through “elevat[ing] the content that belongs to perception, feeling, and intuition into the form of universal notions, principles, and laws, etc.” (EL 77 / 108 [ §38]). These principles and laws are thus not innate, or the products of pure reason or understanding, but they are derived from and justifi ed by empirical experience alone. Hegel maintains, however, that there is a “fundamental deception” ( Grundt ä uschung) in such empiricism: for, in the very process of giving an empirical account of knowledge and the world, it presupposes, and makes surreptitious use of, “the metaphysical categories of matter, force, as well as those of one, many, universality, and the infi nite, etc., and it goes on to draw conclusions, guided by categories of this sort, presupposing and applying the forms of syllogising in the process” (EL 77-8 / 108 [ §38 R]). 36 Locke, for example, presupposes the metaphysical concept of “simplicity” – employed by both Descartes and Leibniz – in his account of the empirical, sensuous origin of what he calls our “ideas”: for he claims that such ideas “enter by the Senses simple and unmixed”, even though, by his own admission, “Sight and Touch often take in from the same Object, at the same time, different Ideas”. 37 In this respect, Hegel contends, empiricism remains deeply mired in the metaphysics it opposes (see EL 77-8 / 108-9 [ §38 R]).

David Hume later radicalizes empiricism by observing – “correctly”, in Hegel’s view – that sense perception can provide no warrant for the thought of
