a universal and necessary connection, that is, for the principle or category of causality (and the judgements in which the latter is employed) (EL 80 / 111 [ § 39]). 38 For Hume, we see this happen and then that, but “we perceive neither cause nor effect” (LL 29 / 36). In this sense, Hume has a more sceptical attitude towards a category that is central to metaphysics – causality – than does Locke, who claims without hesitation that qualities in things “affect” our sense organs and thereby produce ideas in us through their “Powers”. 39

Yet, for Hegel, Hume is still wedded to metaphysics, since he “leaves thinking” – as opposed to perception – “with abstraction only, with formal universality and identity” (EL 77 / 108 [ §38 R]). In his Inquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748) Hume famously distinguishes “Matters of Fact”, which are based on “the present testimony of our senses or the records of our memory”, from “Relations of Ideas”, which concern quantity and number and are “discoverable by the mere operation of thought”. Such relations, he tells us, consist in the “equality or inequality” between the parts of quantity and number, and so rest, ultimately, on the principles of identity and non-contradiction. 40 Hume is thus by no means as sceptical of metaphysics as he could be: for, though he professes to be a consistent empiricist, his conception of thought coincides in important ways with that of the arch-metaphysician, Christian Wolff.

According to Hegel, therefore, empiricism is more closely tied to metaphysical thinking than its advocates realize. It proceeds “without knowing that it thereby itself contains metaphysics and is engaged in it, and that it is using those categories and their connections in a totally uncritical and unconscious manner” (EL 78 / 109 [ §38 R]). In the preface to the second edition of the Logic Hegel levels a similar charge against those who are critical of his own speculative philosophy. He does not there address specifi c arguments of his opponents, but he objects to the fact that “their opinions and objections contain categories which are presuppositions and themselves in need of being criticized fi rst before they are put to use” (SL 20 / LS 20-1).

Such presuppositions, Hegel tells us, include the assertions that “infi nity is different from fi nitude, content something else than form, the inner something else than the outer, likewise that mediation is not immediacy” (SL 21 / LS 21- 2). His critics thus accuse him of failing to respect what they take to be fundamental distinctions and oppositions between categories. Note, however, that Hegel does not criticize his critics in turn just for making such distinctions; we will see further on that the latter are not erased by speculative philosophy, but are preserved – albeit in a qualifi ed form – in the very idea of the “unity of opposites”. 41 His criticism of his critics is that they simply assume such distinctions to be defi nitive, in an unrefl ective and uncritical manner, and do not take the trouble to discover whether they are defi nitive. His critics fail to see that it is illegitimate simply “to presuppose and straight away accept” such
