distinctions, and that “the requirement and the business of logical thinking is to investigate precisely whether such a fi nite without infi nity is something true” (SL 21 / LS 22). Hegel makes a similar criticism of everyday consciousness and of metaphysics. The former uses categories unconsciously and instinctively, whereas the latter employs them consciously to comprehend the objects of reason (and is tied more closely to understanding than is everyday consciousness [see 1: 9]); but both take their categories for granted uncritically without further ado. 42

In Hegel’s view, such uncritical taking-for-granted is problematic because it confl icts with Kant’s insistence at the end of the eighteenth century on the need for a critique of reason, and also with the principle of freedom that informs modern philosophy and the modern age more generally. 43 This latter principle, we are told, has its source in the Reformation and implicitly underlies the thought of the founder of modern philosophy, Ren éDescartes. In the modern period, Hegel maintains, “what has to be acknowledged is thinking freely on its own account, and this can happen only through my thinking freely within myself”. Accordingly, human beings must now scrutinize their thought and set aside whatever rests on “sheer authority” rather than freedom, including the authority of the understanding and of mere assumption as such. In philosophy, therefore, as Hegel puts it, “we must renounce every presupposition and prejudice”, “since every presupposition is something found already there that thinking has not posited” (LHP 3: 104, 108-9 / VGP 4: 88, 92-3). This directive, of course, is the principle that guides Descartes; for Hegel, Descartes’ insistence that we must doubt and set aside all our assumptions is thus a clear expression of modern freedom, even though he does not explicitly emphasize freedom in his work (LHP 3: 109 / VPG 4: 93). 44

Hegel notes, however, that Descartes does not adhere consistently to this principle but makes assumptions of his own. At one point in the Principles of Philosophy (1644), for example, Descartes turns to consider “ substance, duration, order”, but, in Hegel’s view, the defi nitions he provides of them are simply those he fi nds – that is, assumes – to be true. As Hegel puts it, therefore, Descartes “lays down as the basic principle that nothing must be assumed”, but “the differentiated content or the representations to which he passes on at this point he still takes up as something found [ ein Gefundenes] within our consciousness” (LHP 3: 114 / VGP 4: 98). 45 There are also unexplained assumptions in the Meditations (1641). In the third Meditation, for example, Descartes asserts that “there must be at least as much reality in the effi cient and total cause as in the effect of that cause”, while telling us only that “it is manifest by the natural light” that this is so; 46 and in the second Meditation, Descartes asserts that I am “a thing that thinks” without explaining why thought should be attached to a “thing” at all. Indeed, Hegel suggests that one could even omit the “I” from thought and be left with “only thinking and being”, in which case
