Descartes’ argument, “I think, therefore I am”, would be reduced to the much simpler “thinking, therefore ‘is’ ” (or “ thought, therefore being ”) – an argument that Hegel himself relies on to show that speculative logic must be ontology. 47

From a Hegelian perspective, therefore, much of Descartes’ philosophy is at odds with the modern principle, which he endorses, that “one must make no presupposition” (LHP 3: 109 / VGP 4: 92). So, too, is the uncritical assumption made by other pre-Kantian metaphysicians and empiricists (and by Hegel’s own critics) that categories should be conceived as the understanding conceives of them. Accordingly, Hegel believes, the principle of modern freedom requires us to abandon this assumption and consider anew how the categories should be conceived. Indeed, it requires us to abandon all determinate assumptions about thought and to undertake a study of the categories that is altogether presuppositionless. 48

The task of Hegel’s Logic will be to undertake precisely this study. It will be a critical study because it will not assume in advance that we already know how categories are to be understood. In particular, it will not presuppose that opposed categories are – or are not – defi nitively opposed, but it will seek to discover whether “a fi nite without infi nity is something true; likewise, whether such an abstracted infi nity, or whether a content without form or a form without content, an inner by itself that has no expression, an externality without inwardness, whether any of this is something true or something actual” (SL 21 / LS 22). Indeed, Hegel’s study may not assume from the outset that specifi c categories belong to thought at all, but it must start from the sheer indeterminate being of thought – the simple “is” of thinking – and seek to discover whether any categories belong to it. Those categories that do emerge in the course of Hegel’s speculative logic will thus not just have been taken for granted, but will have been derived from, and so shown to be inherent in and made necessary by, thought itself. In Hegel’s view, this process of deriving categories, without presupposing their form or content at the start, will also show how they are to be conceived in truth (and thereby “clarify” or “purify” them). It will thus disclose whether categorial “predicates” of the kind employed by metaphysics “are something true in and for themselves” and, in so doing, “whether the form of the judgment could be the form of truth” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 R]). 49

Note, by the way, that the fact that certain categories prove, in speculative logic, to be inherent in thought, and so necessary, does not mean that they should therefore all be equally explicit in the thought of every individual and people. As we shall see, such logic discloses the necessary categories of thought by rendering explicit what is implicit in thought, and in so doing it shows that these categories are themselves merely implicit at fi rst. 50 This means, of course, that they are merely implicit at fi rst in logic; but this idea is not incompatible with the idea that they are merely implicit at fi rst in history and in the consciousness of individuals, too. Categories can thus prove in logic to be
