inherent in thought and yet still be merely implicit in, or indeed absent from, the thought of certain historical peoples and of children in the early stages of learning language; and they can also be expressed more explicitly, yet be employed only “instinctively and unconsciously”, by ordinary, everyday consciousness (SL 19 / LS 19).

The project of Hegel’s logic – to discover anew and without prior assumptions which categories, if any, are inherent in thought – does not, therefore, render unintelligible in history and everyday life the merely implicit presence, or the absence, or the merely instinctive employment of such categories. Indeed, a major task of such logic, as Hegel conceives it, is precisely to provide a thorough, non-question-begging derivation and clarifi cation of the categories that are employed instinctively, and without a clear grasp of their proper form and content, by everyday consciousness. “As impulses”, Hegel writes, “the categories do their work only instinctively; they are brought to consciousness one by one and so are variable and mutually confusing, thus affording to spirit only fragmentary and uncertain actuality”, and so, as noted above, they can deceive us about the very world they open up (see 1: 6). “To purify [ reinigen] these categories and in them to elevate spirit [ Geist] to freedom and truth, this is therefore the loftier business of logic” (SL 17 / LS 17). At the same time Hegel’s logic will “reconstruct” the categories and forms of reasoning that have been employed consciously by metaphysics and analysed in formal logic (SL 19 / LS 19). It will thus provide a new and presuppositionless conception of the categories and forms of reasoning whose character both ordinary consciousness and metaphysics have previously just taken for granted.

Karl Popper suspects Hegel of trying to “destroy all argument and all progress” through the “mystery method” of “ dialectics”. 51 Hegel’s real aim in the Logic is, however, far less sinister than Popper would have us believe. It is to undertake a thoroughly critical and open-minded study of thought, and thereby to bring us to an “educated cognition of the thought-relationships”, or categories, that permeate to varying degrees, and often unconsciously, all human experience, understanding and reasoning (EL 11 / 23 [Preface to 2nd edn]). 52
