# Categories, Language and Metaphysics

## The Role of Categories

Hegel’s Science of Logic is a dense and diffi cult work, but its aim is easily stated: to “clarify” or “purify” ( reinigen) the basic categories of thought (SL 17 / LS 17). It is tempting to think that simply opening our eyes confronts us with objects. In Hegel’s view, however, the matter is not that simple: opening our eyes merely lets in light and gives rise to visual sensations of colour. Strictly  speaking, therefore, we do not actually see objects before us; all we see is a two- dimensional “plane” ( Fl ä che) of colours. 1  So how do we come to experience objects? We do so, Hegel claims, by understanding what we see (and perceive through the other senses) in terms of general concepts or “categories” – a term he borrows from Aristotle and Kant (see LL 21, 34 / 25, 42). Such categories, for Hegel, include the thoughts of “something”, “quantity”, and “cause”. They make the experience of objects possible by enabling us to regard what we perceive as more than just an array of colours – as something, an object, that has a certain magnitude and exercises a causal infl uence on other things. 2

In Hegel’s view, therefore, objects are not simply given to us by the senses. We experience objects because, by means of categories, we understand what we see and hear to be an object. Such categories, Hegel contends, are not themselves the result of sensation but have their source in thought (though, as we shall see, their ultimate ground is the rationality in being itself). 3  Our experience of objects is thus the result of cooperation between sensation and thought. Hegel’s claim, however, is not that we fi rst have sensations and then bring categories to bear on them; rather, we understand and “categorize” what we see and hear as we see and hear it. 4  According to Hegel, therefore, we never have
