unconceptualized sensations (at least when we are no longer very young children): we never see colours without understanding them to belong to some object, or to be something in their own right. In this sense, whenever we open our eyes, we do, indeed, “see” objects. Yet such “seeing” is not mere visual sensation, but the “concrete habit which immediately unites in one simple act the many determinations of sensation, consciousness, intuition, understanding, etc.” (EPM 132 / 186 [ §410 R]). 5

For Hegel, thought and its categories inform all our sensing and perceiving (and, indeed, our imagining and desiring). This, he claims, is what distinguishes human beings from other animals. 6  Non-human animals, we are told, remain immersed in unconceptualized sensations: they feel specifi c pleasures and pains and associate these with what they see, but they do not think of what they see as an object with qualities, magnitude, form and so on. 7  In the human being, by contrast, what Hegel calls “the logical” ( das Logische) – thought and its categories – “permeates all his natural behavior, his ways of sensing, intuiting, desiring, his needs and impulses; and it thereby makes them into something truly human” (SL 12 / LS 10). All human experience (beyond that of the very young) is thus mediated by categories. 8

Hegel notes that the categories or “forms of thought [ Denkformen] are fi rst set out and stored in human language” (SL 12 / LS 9-10). They are given implicit or explicit expression in words; or, as Hegel puts it in his philosophy of spirit, “it is in names that we think” (EPM 199 / 278 [ §462 R]). Categories thus inform and permeate our sensing and imagining insofar as language informs them. As Hegel writes,

> In all that becomes something inward for the human being, or a representation as such, in whatever he makes his own, language has penetrated, and everything that he transforms into language and expresses in it contains a category [ Kategorie], whether concealed, mixed, or well defi ned. So much is the logical natural to the human being, or rather it is his very nature itself. 

—SL 12 / LS 10

Language, however, is something we have to learn. Before we learn it, when we are still very young, we are thus immersed, much like non-human animals, in sensations that are as yet unconceptualized. Instead of experiencing identifi able objects, therefore, “initially the child has only a sensation of light by which things are manifest to it” (EPM 56 / 80 [ §396 A]). As we learn language, thought and its categories then gradually come to inform our whole consciousness; and, Hegel notes, explicit “instruction in grammar” also draws the attention of children to “distinctions of thought” (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). 9 In this way, although it is not initially true, it comes to be true of human beings that they never have unconceptualized sensations. 10
