Moreover, as our command of language improves, so the range of categories that permeate our consciousness increases. Individuals at different stages of linguistic development will thus understand the world in subtly different ways. Hegel also believes that whole languages can give expression to basic categories to different degrees and may not express certain categories at all (at least before certain points in their history), so different peoples and civilisations can understand the world in subtly different ways, too. “It is to the advantage of a language”, Hegel writes, “when it possesses a wealth of logical expressions, that is, specifi c and separate expressions for the thought determinations themselves”, and in certain languages “many of the prepositions and articles already pertain to relations based on thought”; “the Chinese language”, however, “has apparently not developed to this stage at all, or only to an inadequate extent” (SL 12 / LS 10). Whether this supposition about Chinese is correct, I cannot say; but Hegel’s remark confi rms that, in his view, speakers of different languages can experience the world through different categories (or through the same categories conceived in different ways). 11

For Immanuel Kant, the twelve categories listed in the Critique of Pure Reason (1781, 2nd edn 1787) are the universal conditions of the objects of experience (though they must be “awakened into exercise” by experience itself) (see CPR B 1, 106, 195-7). For Hegel, by contrast, while the experience of objects necessarily presupposes categories, it does not presuppose that all people and peoples employ precisely the same ones or understand the ones they share in precisely the same way. Furthermore, Hegel thinks that in the course of history human beings can change the categories they employ. Indeed, he claims, “all revolutions, in the sciences no less than in world history, originate solely from the fact that spirit [ . . . ] has changed its categories, comprehending itself more truly, more deeply, more intimately, and more in unity with itself” (EN 11 / 20-1 [ §246 A]). As an example of what he has in mind, Hegel maintains in the Logic that in early nineteenth-century physics, “where the predominant category previously was that of force, it is the category of polarity that now plays the most signifi cant role” (SL 13 / LS 11). 12 In contrast to Kant, therefore, Hegel does not consider the categories of thought to be straightforwardly universal. He believes, rather, that “the advance of culture in general and of the sciences in particular [ . . . ] gradually fosters the rise of thought-relations [ Denkverh ä ltnisse] that are also more advanced, or it at least raises them to wider universality and consequently brings them to greater notice” (SL 13 / LS 11). 13

Categories, such as “force” and “polarity”, are understood by Hegel to belong principally, though not exclusively, to natural science. Many others, however, fi nd expression and employment primarily in everyday language. As noted above, for example, Hegel thinks that categories are expressed – at least implicitly – in certain languages by common “prepositions and articles”. (Later
