we will see the important role that the prepositions in (in or within), an (in or at) and f ü r (for) play in Hegel’s own account of the categories of Insichsein  (being-within-self), Ansichsein (being-in-itself) and F ü rsichsein (being-for- self).) 14 Hegel also points out that categories are expressed in many languages  by everyday nouns and verbs. Indeed, he thinks that this is the more important way for categories to be expressed, for they are thereby made more explicit or “stamped into objective form” (SL 12 / LS 10). The category of being, for example, fi nds expression in the verb “to be”, in particular in the copula of sentences: as Hegel notes, “categories, like being, or singularity, are already mingled into every sentence, even when it has a completely sensuous content: ‘This leaf is green’ ” (EL 27 / 45 [ §3 R]).

Examples such as this show that categories are not just the preserve of philosophers and scientists, but inform everything we say in everyday life: they are, as Hegel puts it, “always on our lips” ( immer im Munde) (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). This is the case whatever language we speak, for all human consciousness is informed by categories, if not always in the same way. Categories are expressed in the words and sentences of all speakers of all languages.

Yet for the most part speakers are not aware that their words and sentences give expression to categories. Their employment of categories is thus largely unconscious and instinctive and constitutes a merely “natural logic” in human consciousness (SL 15-17, 19 / LS 14-17, 19). Since categories are, in the main, employed “instinctively”, we do not usually refl ect on them or consider whether we are employing them properly. Indeed, we are so familiar with the words in which they are expressed that we take them for granted without further ado: “ Being, for example, is a pure thought-determination; but it never occurs to us to make ‘is’ the subject matter of our inquiry” (EL 59 / 85 [ §24 A2]). 15 As a consequence, Hegel claims, most people do not have a clear understanding of the categories that inform and guide their consciousness. What is intimately “ familiar” ( bekannt) to us – the categories or the words that express them – is thus, for the most part, not something “ known” ( erkannt) (SL 13 / LS 11; see also PS 18 / 25.). Indeed, it is usually “what is most unknown” (or “unfamiliar”) ( das Unbekannteste) – what we are least conscious of and least disposed to think about. 16

In Hegel’s view, however, if we do not understand the categories properly, we are at their mercy and so, to a greater or lesser degree, unfree, or we risk exposing ourselves to “deception” ( T ä uschung). 17 For much of the time, the largely unconscious categories in our language help us navigate through everyday life successfully. Yet they can also lead us to misunderstand in various ways the very world they open up for us: for they can make us think, for example, that things are more independent of one another, or on the contrary more subject to external causation, than they are. We can see this deception, however, only when our categories have been conceived properly; and this,
