Hegel contends, occurs in his science of logic. The aim of such logic is thus not to reveal an “Absolute” altogether beyond our experience, but to “clarify” (or “purify”), and so to prevent our being deceived by, the categories that are “always on our lips”. The task of Hegel’s logic is thereby also to raise us to greater freedom: for in such logic our thought is guided by the categories no longer just instinctively but “consciously” ( mit Bewu ß tsein), and so is what Hegel calls “intelligent and free activity” which “ knows itself” to be what it is (SL 17 / LS 16-17).

# Metaphysics, Empiricism and their Presuppositions

Hegel believes that in much other Western philosophy categories also guide thought with more than just “instinct”: they are consciously distinguished from other representations and then used to understand the world. He is particularly interested in the way they are employed in metaphysics before the latter is subjected to critique by Kant. In Hegel’s work the term “metaphysics” sometimes refers to the set of categories that informs any consciousness, whether philosophical or non-philosophical: “the diamond net into which everything is brought and thereby fi rst made intelligible” (EN 11 / 20 [ §246 A]). Yet it is also the name he attaches to a central strand of pre-Kantian philosophy in which categories are employed. In such philosophical “metaphysics” Hegel includes mediaeval Scholasticism, as well as the early modern rationalism of Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz (or, rather, core aspects of such rationalism) – though, in his view, the most developed, if not most insightful, form of metaphysics is found in the writings of Christian Wolff, who divided the subject into general metaphysics (or ontology) and special metaphysics (which encompasses cosmology, rational psychology and natural theology). 18

Since philosophy is a refl ective discipline, one might expect metaphysicians, such as Wolff, to consider explicitly how best to understand the categories of thought before employing them. Yet Hegel claims that in pre-Kantian metaphysics, as in everyday life, categories are employed without – or at least without adequate – consideration of whether they are being conceived properly (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]); this is in spite of the fact that they are used in metaphysics with a certain “consciousness”. For this reason, Hegel maintains, metaphysics “incurred the just reproach that it employed the pure forms of thought” – the categories – “ uncritically” ( ohne Kritik) (SL 42 / LS 50-1). Metaphysics sets itself apart from everyday, non-philosophical thinking by seeking a rational, systematic understanding of reality; from Hegel’s perspective, however, it is in fact an “uncritical thinking along [ unkritisches Dahindenken], of the kind that anyone can do” (EL 82 / 115 [ §41 A1]). Hegel does not deny that there is debate among metaphysicians about fundamental categories, such
