as substance, and how they should best be understood. Yet he thinks that, despite such debate, many features of these categories – and, indeed, of thought as such – are taken for granted by metaphysics without question.

As Hegel understands it, pre-Kantian metaphysics seeks to comprehend what it takes to be objects of pure reason (rather than the senses), namely “the soul, the world, God” (EL 68 / 97 [ §30]). 19 It starts from a general conception or “representation” ( Vorstellung) of the latter and then endeavours to determine their nature more precisely through reason alone. Metaphysics carries out its self-appointed task by predicating categories of the objects of reason and so claiming, for example, that the world is “fi nite” or “infi nite” and that the soul is “simple” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]). Such claims may be supported by prior arguments or be the premises of further arguments themselves. Either way, in Hegel’s view, the metaphysical manner of thinking is uncritical, because in proceeding as it does it takes two related ideas for granted without further refl ection. It presupposes, fi rst, “that cognition of the Absolute could come about through attributing predicates to it” in judgements, and, second, that categories or concepts, such as “fi nite” and “infi nite”, or “simple” and “composite”, when taken as distinct from – indeed, in opposition to – one another, can themselves be understood as “ predicates of what is true”. That is to say, metaphysics takes it for granted that knowledge of objects of reason can be expressed in judgements in which distinct categories serve as predicates, and there was “no investigation of whether predicates of this kind are something true in and for themselves, nor of whether the form of the judgment could be the form of truth” (EL 66 / 94 [ §28 and R]). One may wonder how it is possible to think without making judgements about things; yet unless it can be shown why thought must involve judgement, the claim that it does so will remain a mere assumption. This is the case, in Hegel’s view, in pre-Kantian metaphysics.

Metaphysics also assumes that any judgement it makes, such as that the soul is simple or the world is fi nite, is either true or false. In the same vein it assumes that “of two opposed assertions [ . . . ] one must be true, and the other false” (EL 69 / 98 [ §32]); thus, if it is true that the world is fi nite, it is false that it is infi nite. This assumption rests on a further assumption about categories, namely that opposed categories are indeed simply opposed to one another. Metaphysicians may disagree about the exact meaning of the terms “fi nite” and “infi nite”, but, according to Hegel, they agree that being fi nite is the opposite of being infi nite, just as being simple is the opposite of being composite. It is for this reason that it must be false to say that the world is infi nite if it is true that it is fi nite. For metaphysics, therefore, the world is either one or the other; it cannot be both at the same time and in the same respect, because the two categories concerned exclude one another.

This conception of categories, and the “either / or” thinking that it grounds, is named by Hegel “ dogmatism”. Dogmatism, for him, thus consists, not just in
