refusing to revise one’s judgements, but in taking opposed categories to be defi nitively opposed to one another (EL 69 / 98 [ §32]). Such dogmatism, in Hegel’s view, is characteristic of what (following Kant) he calls the “understanding” ( Verstand). “Thinking as understanding”, he maintains, “stops short at the fi xed [ fest] determinacy and its distinctness vis- à -vis other determinacies”; that is, it takes such “determinacies” or categories to stand over against their opposites and so, in each case, to constitute one side of an opposition (EL 125 / 169 [ §80]). It thus holds them to be essentially one-sided, fi nite determinations of thought, each of which begins only where its opposite stops. For the understanding, therefore, each category is simply what it is and is defi nitely not its opposite.

Understanding, in Hegel’s view, governs much of everyday life and, indeed, is essential to it, since it enables us to have “defi nite purposes”, to make clear decisions and to grasp objects in their “determinacy” (EL 126-7 / 170 [ §80 A]). Everyday life, however, is also permeated by an awareness of the dialectic through which opposites turn into one another (for example, in “familiar proverbs” such as “pride goes before a fall”) and of the “speculative” unity of opposites (for example, in religion). 20 Metaphysics, by contrast, is governed more thoroughly by understanding: it is “the way in which the mere understanding views the objects of reason” (EL 65 / 93 [ §27]). It takes what Hegel calls the “totalities” of the soul, world and God and understands them to be either simple or composite, either fi nite or infi nite, and so on (EL 68-9 / 97-8 [ § §30, 32]). Metaphysical understanding can, of course, attribute both opposing predicates to its object under a certain condition: it can judge the object to be fi nite in this respect and infi nite in that respect. Yet it must still judge these two respects to be opposed to one another, and so remains tied to oppositional “either / or” thinking even in this case.

Understanding assumes that opposed categories are simply opposed, because it assumes that each category simply is what it is and is not what it is not. That is to say, understanding is governed by the principle of identity: A is A. 21 The corollary of this principle is the principle of contradiction (or non-contradiction): A is not not-A (see SL 18 / LS 18). These two principles thus constitute the founding assumptions of pre-Kantian metaphysics, as Hegel understands it. They are mere assumptions because metaphysics is unable to prove them but simply takes them for granted. In Hegel’s view, proving these principles would require demonstrating their necessity by deriving them from the very nature of thought; metaphysics, however, provides no such derivation. 22

Christian Wolff, whom Hegel regards as the quintessential metaphysician, tries to avoid just taking the principle of non-contradiction for granted, and he does so (paradoxically for a rationalist) by basing the principle on experience. As he writes in his First Philosophy or Ontology (1730), “we experience this as the nature of our mind: that while it judges that something is, it cannot judge
