# HEGEL ON BEING 

Quality and the Birth of Quantity in Hegel's Science of Logic Volume 1 

## Stephen Houlgate

## IBSN: 9781-3501-8940-9

G.W.F. Hegel’s Science of Logic, fi rst published between 1812 and 1816, is one of the most profound works of philosophy ever written. It is a text of penetrating insight, extraordinary range and incomparable subtlety. Yet it is largely ignored by professional philosophers in the Anglo-American world (and not only there). Other works by Hegel, such as the Phenomenology and the Philosophy of Right, have become more widely studied on both sides of the Atlantic, but the Logic remains for the most part unread and unknown. Karl Popper famously poured scorn on what he called Hegel’s “mystery method” of “ dialectics” for embracing contradiction and so (allegedly) destroying “all argument and all progress” (Popper [1966], 2: 28, 39); and it appears that many Anglo-American philosophers have seen no good reason, and no need, to challenge such dismissive views of Hegelian logic. As a result, few have any understanding of the true philosophical signifi cance of Hegel’s Logic or, indeed, any idea what the book is actually about. Furthermore, the Logic is neglected, or actively disparaged, even by some experts on Hegel who are otherwise sympathetic to his thought. Allen Wood, for example, insists that “Hegel totally failed in his attempt to canonize speculative logic as the only proper form of philosophical thinking”, because “many of the philosophical paradoxes Hegel needs in order to make his system work are based on shallow sophistries” and “the resolution to paradoxes supplied by his system is often artifi cial and unilluminating” (Wood [1990], 4).

The aim of the present study is to explain in clear and accessible terms what Hegel is seeking to achieve in his Logic – in particular in its fi rst book, “the doctrine of being” – and to demonstrate that Hegel’s text, though formidably diffi cult, is full of profound and often challenging insights and very far from “unilluminating”. I have presented many aspects of my interpretation of the Logic in other essays and, especially, in The Opening of Hegel’s Logic (2006). The present study differs from the latter, however, in signifi cant respects.

Most importantly, it covers not just the fi rst two chapters of the section on quality (from “being” to true, “affi rmative infi nity”), as the earlier book does, but the whole of the doctrine of being. The present study thus provides a detailed account of all the categories of quality, quantity and measure, and explains how they are derived by Hegel from the initial category of pure being. In order to highlight the wide-ranging signifi cance of Hegel’s analyses, I also relate them to the thought of other philosophers, including Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Kant, Schelling and Frege. In particular, this study contains an extensive discussion of Hegel’s critique of Kant’s antinomies, and what is to my knowledge the most detailed comparison in English, and perhaps in any language, of Hegel and Frege. This material, together with my account of Hegel’s conception of differential calculus, is presented in chapters entitled “Excursus” to distinguish them from the chapters that actually take Hegel’s speculative logic forward. These excursuses draw on other chapters and are intended to be read as part of the study’s overall argument, but they can be read on their own. They can, however, also be skipped by readers wishing to focus principally on the logical development that Hegel describes, and returned to later.

All chapters have been written specially for the present study, but in some I discuss material that is also covered in The Opening of Hegel’s Logic. Some topics have been treated more concisely in this study than in The Opening, whereas topics discussed rather cursorily in the earlier book (such as Hegel’s critique of Kant) or neglected altogether (such as Hegel’s account of “absolute method” in the fi nal chapter of the Logic) have been given detailed treatment here. This new study is thus designed to complement and extend the analysis of the Logic given in The Opening, rather than replace it. This study does, however, include a discussion of Robert Pippin’s interpretation of Hegel that revises, and I hope improves on, the one presented in The Opening.

While working on this study, and in the years before, I have had the privilege of teaching Hegel’s Logic regularly at the MA level at Warwick and discussing it – often vigorously, but always fruitfully – with my PhD students. In particular, I would like to thank the following (former and current) research students for their inspiring energy, insight and companionship, without which writing this study would have been much harder and a lot less enjoyable: Ben Berger, Gene Flenady, Dino Jaku š i c ́ , James Kay, Richard Lambert, Filip Niklas, Ahilleas Rokni, Chris Russell-Smith, Jaideep Shah, Henry Somers-Hall, Ioannis Trisokkas, Lee Watkins, Graham Wetherall, Mert Yirmibes and Miao Zehao.

As will be clear from both The Opening of Hegel’s Logic and this study, my interpretation of the Logic is indebted in manifold ways to the work of other Hegel scholars. I should like to thank the following in particular for the encouragement, assistance and sometimes much needed challenges that they provided during the genesis of this study – possibly in ways of which they are unaware – both through their published work and through conversation: Michela Bordignon, Brady Bowman, Paolo Diego Bubbio, John Burbidge, Karin de Boer, Alfredo Ferrarin, Max Gottschlich, Dietmar Heidemann, Anton Friedrich Koch, Christian Martin, Angelica Nuzzo, Robert Pippin, Paul Redding, Friederike Schick, Sally Sedgwick, Sebastian Stein, Pirmin Stekeler, Robert Stern, Richard Winfi eld and Michael Wolff.

Much of this study was written while I was the recipient of a Leverhulme Major Research Fellowship from 2011 to 2014. I am enormously grateful to The Leverhulme Trust for supporting what must have seemed a deeply obscure project. This study would certainly not have seen the light of day without their extraordinary generosity. I am also very grateful to the University of Warwick for granting me research leave in 2018-19 to continue work on this study.

Heartfelt thanks are due, too, to my family. To my dear wife, Mary, for her loving support, unending patience and boundless good humour throughout this project. And to our children, Mark, Michael, Margaret and Christopher, to Sarah, Tom and Jenny, and to our wonderful grandchildren, Michael, Lily and Georgia, for constantly reminding me that there is a great world of joy to be found beyond the confi nes of Hegel’s Logic. I do not know whether Michael, Lily or Georgia will ever discover the profound wonders of Hegel’s Logic or if they will ever read Hegel on Being; but if they do decide to read some of the latter in later life, they can fi nally discover what Grandpa was actually doing when he said he was “working”.

## Kenilworth

## February 2021
