# The Arabic Hermes

## From Pagan Sage to Prophet of Science

## Kevin van Bladel

## IBSN: 978-0-19-537613-5

Early arabic accounts tell of an ancient egyptian sage named Hermes Triplicate-in-Wisdom, the founder of the pagan religion before the great Flood, a lawgiver who ascended to the heavenly spheres of the planets and  returned to teach astrology, a true prophet like Jesus and Muḥammad. The teach- ings of this wise Hermes circulated in Arabic translation, having been handed down,  as the accounts said, over long ages by the great philosophers of the past, such as Aristotle and Apollonius of Tyana, or after being rediscovered inscribed on tablets in subterranean chambers of Egyptian ruins. The Arabic books of Hermes claim to  explain the hidden workings of the universe, the secrets of creation, and the myster- ies of nature. They offer means to predict the future from astral omens, instructions  for the manufacture of potent talismans, and encrypted directions for manufactur- ing the elixir of the alchemists. To this day many of these works survive intact, wait- ing for modern readers in dozens of Arabic manuscripts. Most of them have never  been printed.

Both the legends about Hermes and the works attributed to him in Arabic pres- ent complicated puzzles for the historian. They are part of the rich product of late  antiquity out of which early Arabic culture, in all its aspects, grew, and one piece of the enormous body of knowledge translated into Arabic from the books of the ancients (as they called them), on which much of Arabic literature was based. To  unravel this tradition of many strands is a manifold task. It is not enough to under- stand the Arabic context, even if that alone is diffi cult and the subject of ongoing  research. One must also look back to the ancient background from which the Arabic  Hermetica came into being, and forward to their celebrated reception in fi fteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe, which has endowed them with a special importance  for modern scholarship in European languages. At the same time, interest in the Hermetica reached far beyond Europe, where there are totally unexplored avenues of research and untold histories. Works of Hermes never known in Europe were copied and studied from Morocco to India, surviving today in mosque collections and national and private libraries of North Africa and Asia. For example, as late as
the nineteenth century, an Iranian intellectual could still fi nd it worth his while to translate an alchemical revelation of Hermes claiming ancient Egyptian origins from Arabic into his mother tongue, Persian.1  When the British government of India purchased the remains of the Royal Library of the fallen Muġal Emperors in  Delhi in 1859, there were Arabic works of Hermes among those thousands of vol- umes.2  What these Hermetic texts, and the fi gure of Hermes Trismegistus himself, meant to their numerous audiences in far-fl ung lands remains to be discovered. It is  certain, however, that the European Hermetic movement that began in the late fi f- teenth century is only one part of something much greater, at the center of which,  geographically and chronologically, is the Arabic tradition.

## 1.1 The Ancient Greek Hermetica of Roman Egypt and their European Reception

Sometime in the fi rst centuries of the Common Era, certain anonymous sages in Roman Egypt, apparently over several generations, wrote treatises on science and philosophy in Greek while professing to be part of a distinctly Egyptian tradition.3 A number of these works portray dialogues between various Egyptian gods, some  given Greek names and others retaining their Egyptian names. The principal char- acter in these texts is Hermes, the Greek syncretic equivalent of the Egyptian god of  knowledge and writing, Thoth. Hermes usually appears as the teacher of the other characters in the dialogues, including Tat, Ammon, and Asclepius. From the main teacher we take the name of the texts as a group: Hermetica, writings having to do with Hermes. The Hermes here is often dubbed Sqirlå cirso|, Trismegistus, the “thrice-greatest,” an epithet in loan translation from an old Egyptian title of Thoth, found fi rst in Greek in the usage of Egyptian priests of the Ptolemaic period as lå cirso| ja≠ låcirso| heø| lå ca|, “greatest and greatest great god.”4  In this way the Egyptian Hermes is distinguished from the mischievous Olympian messenger god Hermes of Greek mythology.

The Greek Hermetica of Roman Egypt deal with a wide range of topics, includ- ing astrology, cosmology, and medicine. They describe a philosophical education,  revealed by Hermes and others on the basis of divine insights, through which his disciples could know and understand the soul, the universe, and God. Garth Fowden has neatly summarized the cosmos taught in the Hermetica:

> God is one, and the creator of all things, which continue to depend on God as elements in a hierarchy of beings. Second in this hierarchy after God 
> himself comes the intelligible world, and then the sensible world. The cre- ative and benefi cent powers of God fl ow through the intelligible and sensible  realms to the sun, which is the demiurge around which revolve the eight spheres of the fi xed stars, the planets and the earth.5  From these spheres depend the daemons, and from the daemons Man, who is a microcosm of  creation. Thus everything is part of God, and God is in everything, his cre- ative activity continuing unceasingly. All things are one and the pleroma of  being is indestructible.6

Human beings are constrained in the hierarchy of cosmic sympathies and subject to the force of the daemons; that is, they are bound in the cosmos by fate. Altogether, these ideas were not unique to the authors of the Hermetica. One could say they were, in varying forms, popular ideas around the Mediterranean under Roman rule. But what makes the Hermetica special is their response to the situation of humans in the world. The Egyptian Hermes imparts two kinds of knowledge in his books. First, it is possible to gain a degree of power in and control over the terrestrial world  through a knowledge of the sympathetic harmony of the celestial forces with par- ticular terrestrial things. Thus Hermes teaches, for example, the interpretation of  heavenly signs for the prognostication of the future, as well as the occult properties of substances, such as different plants, and the astral powers they possess from their planetary sympathies. Modern scholars have called such treatises technical because they explain techniques for the application of the knowledge of the principles and forces at work in the universe to daily life and practical problems. Second, and more famously, Hermes teaches his disciples in the dialogues how to transcend their bodily  circumstances and to overcome fate through purifi cation of the intellect and con- templation, leading to a true knowledge of God.7  Much of the appeal in the dis- courses of Hermes lies in this promise of higher knowledge of a greater, divine self  liberated from worldly conditions through a developed understanding, and this goal must partly have motivated the anonymous community that composed these texts.

The Greek Hermetica best known today are of the latter type, the philosophical dialogues. They came to the attention of scholars in the Latin tradition of Western Europe in 1460, when a monk named Leonardo brought a manuscript of Greek Hermetic texts to Cosimo de’ Medici in Florence from somewhere in Macedonia.8 The scholar Marsilio Ficino was asked to set aside his translation of the works of Plato and to give precedence to Hermes, who was thought to be much more ancient
than the classical Greek authors. His translation was published in 1471, and over the next century and a half this Latin version of the Greek Hermetica went through twenty-fi ve editions.9  The editio princeps of the Greek original was produced by Adrianus Turnebus in 1554. Greeted with extraordinary interest, the Greek Hermetica were thought during this period to derive from before the great Flood or at least to be contemporary with Moses, and to represent the primordial, original wellspring of philosophy. They were therefore regarded as authorities on a par with the book of Genesis, a discovery of utmost importance. Renaissance authors used them as source texts for a new movement that blended Neoplatonism, Jewish Cabbala, and the teachings of the Hermetica into a system of thought called Hermetism today. Historians have amply documented the deep infl uence of these works on scholars in Western Europe from the end of the fi fteenth through the seventeenth century, and more marginally thereafter until the present.10

The beginning of the end of Hermetic popularity was in 1614, when Isaac Casaubon showed that the Greek Hermetica were not so ancient as had been thought, but rather were apparently derivative products of the early Christian era. Although his arguments did not become widely known immediately, the prestige of the Hermetica declined markedly by the end of the century as Casaubon’s research had its effect.11 Hermann Conring, a professor of medicine at the University of Helmstedt, argued in 1648 against the claims to a Hermetic legacy made by the alchemist followers of Paracelsus.12 Casaubon, Conring, and others after them effectively dispelled the aura of primordial authenticity around the Hermetica themselves as well as the supposed ongoing heritage of those texts. Following these and other attacks, the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries  witnessed a low ebb of interest in the Hermetica, though Egyptomaniacs, alche- mists, members of secret societies, and those involved in currents of esoteric  thought continued to use and study them. Between 1630 and 1856 there were no new editions or reprints of the Greek text of the Hermetica brought to light by  Ficino, a sure sign of attenuated scholarly interest.13 The Hermetic movement cre- ated in the sixteenth century diminished greatly during the subsequent period of  “scientifi c revolution,” when scholars relied less and less on ancient writings for scientifi c authority.

It was only with the new methods and purposes of classical scholarship devel- oped in the nineteenth century that the Greek Hermetica found a restored place in
respected research, now not as sources of inspiration and esoteric teachings but as historical artifacts to be fi tted into a detailed and comprehensive record of Greek and Roman “civilizations,” then a new framework of study. For some practitioners  of the newly developing fi eld of religious studies, the Hermetica became docu- ments of an alleged perennial philosophy and sources for structuralist schemes.  The occultists of the Romantic and Modern eras also found their own interest in these texts.

For much of the twentieth century the scholarly effort to explain the Hermetica as products of a historical context remained inconclusive. The debate about them effectively centered on determining to which “nation” they belonged, whether they were essentially Greek and therefore European or “Western,” or Egyptian and Oriental and therefore foreign, and secondarily on whether or not a particular defi ned community produced them. If a group of authors could be found, then ascertaining their relationship to other religious movements, construed broadly as Judaism, Christianity, Gnosticism, and paganism, would help to give them their historical place. (Today these broad categories seem somewhat simplistic.) The monumental labor of Festugière in the 1940s and ’50s seemed to show defi nitively that the Hermetica were, in fact, totally Hellenistic in content and form and owed nothing essential to non-Greek cultures. He wrote four volumes to prove his point.14

In the late 1970s and the 1980s, studies by Jean-Pierre Mahé and Garth Fowden argued that there is indeed something distinctively Egyptian in them, and that they can be really understood only when we place them in the context of Hellenistic Egypt and indigenous Egyptian cultural tradition.15 Mahé hypothesized that the Greek texts are descendants of the Egyptian genre of aphoristic instructions.16 Fowden showed convincingly that one cannot understand the genesis of the Hermetica without locating them within the social contexts of Roman Egypt. His well-documented arguments make the Hermetica neither essentially Greek nor  Egyptian but the product of a Roman Egyptian society that had synthesized prac- tices and ideas current in both of these linguistic, cultural, and religious traditions,  a society that must be understood without an easy separation of “Greek” and “Egyptian” characteristics. It seems safe to say that our present understanding of the Greek Hermetica stands with Fowden.
Further research in Egyptology may well be able to elucidate more tangible local roots of the Hermetica in the scrolls of the Egyptian priests of the Roman period.17 Indeed, direct evidence of a possible Egyptian literary background to the Hermetica has recently emerged. In 2005 two Egyptologists, Richard Jasnow and Karl-Theodor Zauzich, published an edition of a Demotic Egyptian text containing a dialogue of instruction between the god Thoth and a student, called mr-rx, “lover of knowledge” or perhaps “philosopher.” The manuscripts, many incomplete pieces of what was once apparently a long text kept in Egyptian temple libraries, have been dated approximately to the period from the fi rst century bce to the second century ce. This is just the period during which the Greek Hermetica are generally supposed to have had their genesis. Because the contents of this Demotic Book of Thoth (so dubbed by its editors) do not exhibit an “admixture of hellenistic philosophy,” as the Greek Hermetica clearly do, the editors of the text have prudently concluded that the work is not a direct ancestor of the Greek Hermetica, though it may be rather “one of the grandfathers” of the Greek Hermetica.18 Both are dialogues between Thoth-Hermes and a pupil on theological subjects, so it is easy to imagine a connection between them, but no convincing parallel has yet been discovered, either in wording or in doctrine, despite the editors’ best efforts to do so. The assessment of the ancient author of the De mysteriis Aegyptiorum was that “those documents . . . which circulate under the name of Hermes contain Hermetic doctrines, even if they often employ the terminology of the philosophers; for they were translated from the Egyptian tongue by men not unversed in philosophy.”19 This view now seems more likely to win the day than ever before, but it will certainly require a careful comparative study by a scholar at home in both Egyptology, particularly in Demotic Egyptian, and  ancient Greek. Perhaps undiscovered Egyptian texts will contribute further to solv- ing the problem of the formation of the Greek Hermetica.

Even within Greek literature itself, there are still unexplored avenues for schol- arly research. The title Corpus Hermeticum is normally used to refer only to the  Greek philosophical Hermetica brought to light in fi fteenth-century Italy (though often in practice it also includes the text surviving complete only in Latin translation
known as the Asclepius, and other related fragments), for it is these texts that enjoyed such celebrity when they came to the attention of early modern Europeans. However, there are quite a few more works attributed to Hermes surviving in Greek than just these philosophical discourses, contrary to the implication in the authority- granting and comprehensive-sounding title Corpus.  20 Although specialists do take them all into account, the recent English translations of the Corpus Hermeticum do not include the important and substantial Greek excerpts of Hermetic dialogues found in the Stobaean Anthology.  21 The Greek texts attributed to Hermes dealing with omens, the use of the occult properties of substances, and related practices—as opposed to theoretical discussions, philosophy, and descriptions of meditations such as those found in the Greek Corpus Hermeticum—are even more neglected, practically unknown. The modern view of the Greek Hermetica is largely focused on a limited section of what was and indeed is still available.22

Understanding the Hermetica requires also that works attributed to Hermes in languages other than Greek be taken into account, and again specialists have not failed to notice them. The Coptic translations of Greek Hermetica, discovered in the Nag< Ḥammādī codices, have by now received much well-deserved attention.23 Some of these Hermetica in Coptic do not survive in their original Greek, and they were not published until the 1970s. One of these previously unknown texts is a dialogue in which Trismegistus initiates his disciple into the ineffable mysteries of the mind, instructing him to inscribe the teaching in hieroglyphic characters and to head the text with an oath to protect its contents from misuse. The Coptic codex also includes a substantial portion of the Perfect Discourse, surviving also in the Latin translation known as Asclepius. The latter version has attracted students in the Latin tradition in ancient, medieval, and modern times.24 The Armenian Hermetic text called The Defi nitions of Hermes, translated from Greek and with later interpolations, has been
edited and studied by Mahé; Armenian authors from the sixth century onward cited it.25 There is also a large number of medieval Latin Hermetica; these need research not only on their contents and doctrines, but also on their relationship to the Hermetica in other languages. Fortunately a new series of studies organized by Paolo  Lucentini under the name Hermes Latinus has appeared, seeking to fi ll this gap, pub- lished in the series Corpus Christianorum: Continuatio Mediaevalis.  26 With the help of these new editions and studies of the European Latin Hermetica of the Middle Ages, one can begin to reach an idea of what was already available in Latin Europe before the Greek Corpus Hermeticum was published in Latin in the late fi fteenth century.

The present book is aimed at the least understood part of Hermetic tradition. There are probably more works attributed to Hermes surviving in Arabic than in any other language, and the majority of them are still unknown and unpublished. Some of them defi nitely derive from ancient Greek sources through translation. Others, like many of the Latin Hermetica, are later works originally composed in Arabic. Yet even where the texts themselves are not of ancient origin, the idea of Hermes is. The problem then is to establish the means and continuity of tradition from the ancient Hermetica, and what people thought about Hermes, to the time of their attestation in Arabic.

The fi rst principle for researchers in Graeco-Arabic studies, as Dimitri Gutas defi ned it, is a matter of common sense: nothing was translated from Greek into Arabic unless it was available in manuscripts to the translators.27 Put differently, the  Arabic reception of works in translation from Greek, as well as from other lan- guages, is a product of the period now generally called late antiquity. It is funda- mental therefore to trace the history of the Hermetica and their reception, insofar as  we can discern them, down to the time of the Arabic translators in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries. One way to sketch the earlier history of the texts is to notice who mentions them and for what purpose. At the same time it is possible to arrive at a general idea of the interest readers had in the Hermetica down to that time.

# 1.2 The Reception of the Greek Hermetica in Antiquity

A complete history of the reception of the Hermetica is still required, but for now a brief chronological outline of the early readership of these texts in antiquity will
have to suffi ce. What follows is based largely on the useful collection of testimonia  by Scott, completed by A. S. Ferguson; the reader may fi nd complete textual refer- ences there.28 The nature of these testimonia is largely doxographic, so they tell us  mostly about the reception of the philosophical Hermetica by theologians, whose works survive in large number, whereas exceedingly little is known about the history and use of the technical Hermetica. One may assume that works of Hermes on astral divination and the occult properties of substances continued to circulate among scientists and astrologers without hiatus.

We know little for certain about the original community or communities that produced the Greek Hermetica, except that they were pagans in Roman Egypt who saw their teachings as distinctly Egyptian.29 It seems likely to me that they included  members of the Egyptian priesthood.30 Whether one imagines them as a philosoph- ical sect or a religious movement depends on how one defi nes those terms.31 The  earliest external references to Hermes Trismegistus as an authoritative fi gure come into view in early Christian writings of the second and third centuries. Athenagoras (late second cent.) cites a passage of an unknown Hermetic work to support the  well-known antipagan argument that the beings worshipped as gods by the poly- theists were all really men of bygone times. Tertullian (fl . ca 200) points to the limits  of human knowledge when he says that not even Hermes, “the master of all natural philosophers,” could explain the origin of matter. One can see from such a remark that even from the beginnings of the attestation of the Hermetica, authors who knew them believed them to be very ancient. The pseudo-Justin who wrote the Cohortatio ad gentiles (third cent.) provides the earliest citation of what would become Hermes Trismegistus’ most popular words for theologians: “It is diffi cult to  understand God, but for the one who does, he is impossible to describe.” Non- Christians read the Hermetica, too. Around 300, in Egypt, the early alchemist
Zosimus of Panopolis demonstrated his familiarity with “sacred books” of Hermes and quoted Hermetica in his works, which survive in the original Greek and in  Syriac translation. According to some evidence, works of Hermes were also trans- lated into Middle Persian already in the third century, in the court of the Iranian  emperor Šāpūr I (d. 270), along with works of Ptolemy, Dorotheus, and other astrol- ogers. Chapter 2 deals with this Persian reception of the Hermetica and the attempt  to establish its date.

The Christian Arnobius, at the beginning of the fourth century, included Mercurius (Latin for Hermes) among the pagan philosophers against whom he was arguing. His student Lactantius took a different approach, citing philosophical Greek Hermetica to make the case that God is one and truly above the world. This is the earliest example of what became a common use of the Hermetica: citing the  pagan philosopher Hermes in support of Christian theology. For centuries thereaf- ter, late antique and medieval Christians used the Hermetica for apologetic pur- poses.32 The Hermetic treatise The Perfect Discourse, which survives complete only  in a fourth-century Latin compilation known as Asclepius, contains a prophecy about the lamented decline of Egyptian religion and culture, but it was used by Christian writers to prove that paganism was doomed to extinction. Meanwhile the pagan theurgist who wrote the De mysteriis Aegyptiorum, thought to be Iamblichus,33 also mined the Hermetica for materials suitable to his own pagan theology. The fourth-century Syriac poet Ephraem claimed that the Manichaeans, too, considered Hermes one of their prophet’s forerunners. Coptic translations of Hermetica are found in the Nag< Ḥammādī codices from the mid-fourth century, showing that  Egyptian sages read Hermetica in translation in their own language. The fi fth- century anthology of literature and wisdom of the pagan Stobaeus includes some of  the most important extant Greek Hermetica. Hypatia’s father, Theon of Alexandria (fl . ca 364), is supposed to have taught the astronomical works of Hermes, and her friend Synesius, bishop of Cyrene, listed Hermes as one of the four greatest sages of  ancient times. Hermes appears at the end of the sixth century in more generic col- lections of the sayings of ancient philosophers in Greek and in Syriac. The Syriac  collection is especially interesting because it is directed against the obstinately pagan inhabitants of the Syrian city Ḥarrān (Carrhae). (On this work, see section 3.4.1, page 83 in this volume.) In the early fi fth century, Cyril of Alexandria had used Hermes to similar effect in his book refuting the emperor Julian and his treatise against the Christians.

Such a rapid survey cannot do justice to the use and abuse of the Hermetica in  their reception. Each author had his own purposes in using Hermes for an argu- ment, and these need to be understood individually according to their proper con- texts. What should be clear, however, from the collection of these references is that
Hermetica, not all of which survive today, were read, excerpted, and appreciated  widely during the third, fourth, and fi fth centuries, and applied to a variety of ten- dentious theological arguments often not in harmony with their original purposes.  The Hermetica had authority as seemingly authentic documents of an ancient Egyptian wisdom, and that authority is what made them valuable to authors beyond the unknown Egyptians that produced them. It is not clear, however, how many readers really saw the Hermetica directly themselves, as opposed to mere citations handed down through other authors or excerpts in anthologies. Moreover, as Fowden puts it, the “way of Hermes” created and followed by the Roman Egyptian authors of the Hermetica might have been “appreciated outside Egypt, as by Iamblichus, but was not so far as we know put into practice.”34 In other words, the Hermetica really had become documents of a philosophical and spiritual training the specifi cs of which belonged to a bygone era. After the fourth century, there is no  more sign of a living community of devoted successors to the “original” Graeco- Egyptian authors and students of the Hermetica.35

References to Hermetica as authoritative sources of theological arguments con- tinued to appear even when Byzantine power was replaced by the Arab kingdom in  the Middle East during the seventh century. For example, by the year 700, Jacob of Edessa quoted with approval the views of Hermes Trismegistus on God’s creation of the sun in his Syriac Hexaemeron.  36 In this case it is unlikely that he was familiar with Hermetica directly. Probably he found these passages in the treatise of Cyril just mentioned. Yet for him, it was worth citing Hermes to make a point. Also by this time someone had translated the philosophical defi nitions of Hermes into Armenian.37 Hermes had become a mysterious ancient sage, whose wise words of higher understanding were known partly from citations and were used to bolster religious arguments. He was known in many languages at different times: Greek, Latin, Syriac, Coptic, Armenian, and Middle Persian.

The Arabic reception of Hermes, as an idea and an author, began in the eighth  century, in a world very different from that in which the Hermetica had fi rst circu- lated. By that time the Byzantine polity was reduced to parts of Anatolia and the  Balkans, replaced everywhere else by the new Arab empire of unprecedented size.  There was a new ruling religion, as well as a new common language, and a new tra- dition of scholarship was taking shape. To understand the Arabic Hermes, it is nec- essary to have some idea of the larger context of this early Arabic scholarship.
# 1.3 The Birth of Arabic Scholarship and the Book of the Ancients in Bagdad

The Arab conquests and the resulting empire have been treated in many studies, and historians have proposed many theories, not all of them mutually compatible, to  explain these momentous events. Readers new to the subject will fi nd excellent nar- rative overviews elsewhere.38 What follows here is only the briefest possible back- ground to orient readers unfamiliar with the world of letters in which the Arabic  Hermetica fi rst appear.

The 620s and 630s were marked by devastating wars between the Persian and East Roman Empires and by apocalyptic sentiments across the Eastern Mediterranean and Southwest Asia. In these decades, the diverse populations of Arabia united as a new community following the teaching of the prophet Muḥammad of Mecca, who warned through his revelation of God’s imminent judgment at the end of the world  and offered divine laws to his community. After Muḥammad’s death, his commu- nity followed the prophet’s successors, the caliphs. Sedentary and pastoralist alike,  the Arabian peoples, along with allies joining them at every stage, collaborated in the conquest of one half of the former Roman Empire and the entire Sasanian Persian Empire, both of which had weakened defenses after the previous three  decades of intense warfare. The Arab conquests of the lands from the Iberian pen- insula to Central Asia were not nearly as rapid as some histories make them seem,  but were carried out through several generations of institutionalized warfare. The conquerors had to adapt to new and different physical and social environments and to manage their ever-increasing wealth, property on a scale totally unfamiliar to  their recent ancestors. This fi rst century (the seventh to eighth centuries ce) there- fore brought many changes to the Arabic-speaking populations now scattered in a  far-reaching diaspora as a ruling élite. The pattern of caliphal succession, though always contested, especially by supporters of leaders from the family of the prophet, became in the fi rst century essentially dynastic under the Umayyads, a different albeit related family, and the caliphs became effectively kings of an immense empire. The religion of the community following Muḥammad came soon to be defi ned as Islām—a term that had earlier referred to conversion Muḥammad’s community— but its doctrines, law, and theology were still only beginning to take their canonical shapes. Arabic remained the language of the Muslims. By offi cial order Arabic replaced other languages as the medium of administration across all the conquered territory around the year 700. The process was not accomplished overnight, but it was nevertheless the new policy to use Arabic in government and administration.
In 750 the Umayyad dynasty of caliphs, weakened by factionalism, was over- thrown by the Abbāsids, who claimed to represent better the family of the prophet  and who were backed by strong supporters from the prosperous and relatively recently conquered distant provinces of eastern Iran and Central Asia, territories that had previously been outside even the Sasanian Empire. These Abbāsid caliphs were distinguished from their predecessors in following older models of Iranian kingship. One way in which they did this was to encourage scholarship and to fund  scholars, particularly where it could promote their own authority and the prosper- ity of their administration. For example, the caliphs required astrologers, not only  to advise them on the most favorable times for new undertakings, but also to dem- onstrate that Abbāsid power was determined by long-established patterns in the  heavens. Mathematics and medicine had their obvious practical applications. The patronage of and participation in scholarship became an increasingly prestigious and normal interest for members of the caliphal court and the privileged classes under the Abbāsids. In this patronage they employed many non-Arabs, including many scholars learned both in Arabic and in the languages of their communities of origin, such as Persian, Greek, and Aramaic.

The foundation of the new capital of Baġdād in 762, about twenty miles upstream from the former Persian capital, represented the Abbāsid al-Manṣūr’s centralizing  policies and physically brought together populations from all regions and ethnici- ties of the far-fl ung empire, representing many different creeds. The pace of conver- sion to Islam by members of the conquered populations, who now played a greater  role in the administration of government, rapidly increased in the following cen- tury. Many converts had to learn Arabic prayers;39 regardless of their fi rst language,  when their children were schooled, they learned Arabic writing and memorized  Arabic scripture and verse, often attaining fl uency. Arabic became the normal inter- communal medium of learned discussion, as the languages of conquering colonists  have repeatedly done in history. The class of literate bureaucrats, many of them of non-Arab background from both the former Roman and Persian empires, grew  larger and created a new, urbane literature and richly developed sciences of gram- mar and religious tradition, all in Arabic. The introduction of paper technology,  almost simultaneous with the rise of the Abbāsids, facilitated the composition and compilation of written works on multivolume scales previously unknown in the days of the much more expensive parchment. In such circumstances, in which intense intercultural contact in a new arena coincided with a sharply rising regard  for advanced scientifi c learning, patrons commissioned a huge number of transla- tions from the literary languages of those ruled—primarily Greek, Aramaic, and  Persian—into the language of the rulers. Arabic, spoken by the Muslim kings and all
their followers, eclipsed competition in the public life of Muslim urban centers. Book traditions in languages such as Middle Persian and Aramaic were preserved for later ages only among religious scholars in their particular communities.

Of course, Arabic literature, oral and written, was never truly separate from con- tact with other literatures and translation. The Qur>ān itself retells stories from bib- lical and other literature that its audience was expected to know. What makes the  Abbāsid literary effl orescence remarkable is its scale, including the scale of transla- tion, the widespread support for translation, and the prestige of the translated  works. Translation was a full-time profession for a select few, well paid by rich  patrons. Several translators became enduringly famous for their work. The trans- lated texts became models for all later writings on the subjects they covered, stan- dards to emulate, react against, or build upon. In a word, they became classical, but  exclusively in the new language. They were not studied in their original, now obso- lete, languages.40

The Arabic Hermes appears in this context of fresh exchange, in which authors in many fi elds of study and inquiry from many different ethnic backgrounds and countries met together, all using Arabic, in the young capital city of the largest empire the world had ever seen. Hermes is cited as an ancient authority already in  the eighth century in some of the earliest known Arabic scientifi c works, the writ- ings of Iranian court astrologers of the Abbāsids. In the ninth century, Hermes  came to be considered in Arabic literature as not just an ancient scientifi c authority,  but an antediluvian prophet whose revelation formed the very beginnings of sci- ence. His works were therefore thought to have been transmitted from the extremely  distant past as a part of the heritage of the ancient world, recovered by Muslim scholars in this great epoch of translations. With respect to the chronological error— the attribution of very ancient dates to the works of Hermes—the reception of Hermetica in Arabic bears close resemblance to the Western European reception of the Hermetica that began in the fi fteenth century. This is not fortuitous, for the European concept of Hermes Trismegistus as a very ancient sage was derived from Arabic tradition as well as from the Church Fathers.41 The Arabic Hermetica appeared in the midst of the bloom of Arabic literature in every fi eld of human inquiry.
There are very many classical Arabic works attributed to Hermes registered today  in the world’s manuscript catalogs,42 including treatises on magical talismans, astrol- ogy, and alchemy, and ranging in length from short works of a single page to books  of a couple of hundred. Just six of these texts have been published (dealing with astrology, alchemy, talismans, and snake venom), and only a few of them have known origins.43 At least two of the Arabic Hermetica are certainly translations  from Middle Persian, one of which at least is in turn based on known Greek mate- rial.44 Another is a translation from Greek, perhaps a direct translation.45 Where did  the rest of the Arabic Hermetica come from and who wrote them? Perhaps more of the Arabic Hermetica will turn out to be translations of Greek originals, even works lost in the original. Each text promises potentially to preserve in Arabic material deriving from Greek as early as the third century. The history of these Arabic Hermetica within Arabic tradition itself will require extensive study, as well: Hermes is cited or discussed in at least seventy individual Arabic works by different authors from Andalusia to India, dating from the eighth to the eighteenth century; this is based only on preliminary gleanings of the bibliographical sources.46 The massive Arabic Hermetic tradition—if the use and reuse of Hermes as an authority can be called Hermetic tradition—still awaits its modern students.

# 1.4 Understanding the Terms hermetic and Hermeticsm in the Arabic Context

Before going on, it is necessary to deal with a problem of defi nition. In modern scholarly usage, the terms Hermetic and Hermetism are both used to refer to several totally different things in various traditions in different languages and periods. One author uses these terms to refer to anything seeming esoteric, whereas another uses it to refer to anything having to do with alchemy. Another calls any work that even mentions Hermes in passing Hermetic, and still other uses of the word confuse the matter more. These names have been employed in so many ways that there cannot
be any consensus among scholars today about what works can be considered as Hermetica. Is a work Hermetic if it deals with alchemy, or merely if it claims to be a secret text revealed to an elect few? Sometimes Hermetism is treated as a literary genre, and other times it seems to describe a supposed doctrine. Some modern  authors also refer to the Hermetists, meaning those who followed an alleged doc- trine set out in Hermetic works or who practiced Hermetic disciplines. What they  practiced is usually called Hermetism, as if they held a defi nite and specifi c doctrine, yet the nature of this Hermetism has not been adequately addressed in discussion. Even when European alchemists during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries self-consciously describe their doctrines as hermetic, the meaning of the term for them is not entirely clear.47 Yet the terms, as historians employ them, are crucially important, because the moment we use them, we implicitly assert historical and social realities behind them and propose distinctive categories where there may have been none.

The debate about the social reality behind the ancient Greek Hermetica in Egypt has lasted for a long time. Richard Reitzenstein, for example, wanted to see a school or community of Hermetists as the source of the Greek Hermetica.48 This idea was  rejected by the authoritative Festugière as groundless. Instead, he argued that attri- bution to Hermes was just a feature of a literary genre of the Roman Empire in the  fi rst centuries of the Common Era. Thus works attributed to Hermes could be grouped together with similar works falsely attributed to other legendary sages such as Zoroaster.49 Nevertheless, he did not hesitate to use the word hermétisme to describe the doctrines of the Hermetica. Despite Festugière’s criticism, the idea of Hermetists as a historical group in Roman Egypt has been championed by several  later scholars, and this now seems to have been victorious. One of the main argu- ments of Garth Fowden’s The Egyptian Hermes is that there were ancient Hermetists  as such practicing a Hermetism as such, and that the Greek Corpus Hermeticum represents their coherent school of thought. Although he did not state explicitly  exactly when these Hermetists are supposed to have been practicing their way, testi- monia of the discourses of Hermes (the “philosophical” Hermetica) would point to  the second or third century. I fi nd Fowden’s arguments about the character of the circles of spiritual aspirants who produced these texts mostly convincing, though, as he himself admits, his conclusions necessarily involve some uncertainty.50 But even  if we concede that the term Hermetists is suitable to describe the authors and origi- nal readers of the ancient Hermetica, what do we do with the name when we try to  describe the Arabic Hermetica, half a millennium later and more, the doctrines and practices described within them, as well as their authors and readers?
When it comes to the Arabic Hermetica, one fi nds in modern scholarship a highly inconsistent use of the terms Hermetic, Hermetist, and Hermetism. Because the words have ordinarily been used to refer to a putative religious group in early Roman Egypt and its works, or to occultists of early modern Europe, one might expect some critical refl ection on the meaning of these terms when applied to the very different background of early Arabic culture, and to the social realities assumed behind those terms. I have not found any such refl ection on Arabic Hermeticism. Moreover, in the context of Arabic literature, modern scholars generally use the word Hermetic to refer not just to works associated with the name Hermes, but also to all manner of works with allegedly “Gnostic,” “Neoplatonic,” “Neopythagorean,” or “esoteric” tendencies or practically any early Arabic pseudepigraph.51 Above all, it is used to refer to the beliefs of the Ṣābians of Ḥarrān, about whom very little is known, but who have been the subject of seemingly endless speculation. (Their relationship to the Hermetica is the subject of chapter 3.)

In fact, a remarkable number of the modern studies discussing Arabic Hermeticism emphasize just how vaguely defi ned it must have been. It is as if a vague defi nition of the supposed phenomenon proved that the thing itself was vague. The general unwillingness to defi ne the object means that obscure, meaningless, and sometimes simply false assertions about Hermeticism have prevailed. Some have claimed that a given Arabic author or work was Hermetic with hardly any reference to Arabic works of Hermes or any explanation of the term.52 Others allege the great “infl uence of Hermetism on Islam,”53 or oppose the “rational Aristotelianism” to the “irrational Hermeticism” in Arabic philosophy.54 Some fi nd Hermetists in fi gures that they see as marginal to an imagined Islamic orthodoxy, such as certain Šīites, alchemists, and unconventional individuals such as the tenth-century physician ar-Rāzī, or sometimes in any author who so much as cites Hermes.55 Hermetism has even been imagined as a risky belief system dangerous for its adherents because of the
supposedly oppressive “orthodox” Muslims, who, it appears, uniformly hate Hermetists, even though Hermes came to be regarded by Muslims as a prophet.56 Another approach has been to apply the defi nition of the Hermetic genre created by Festugière for the Greek Hermetica to Arabic literature.57 Festugière’s defi nition of  “the hermetic” was, however, fundamentally tied to the motif of revelation of a hid- den text. Consequently, it is of little value in the context of the literature of Muslims,  whose very scripture, the Qur>ān, would have to be described as Hermetic on the  same grounds.58 Characteristic of all such studies is a total or near total lack of atten- tion to the books actually attributed to Hermes in Arabic, not to mention the chron- ological order of hundreds of years of sources.

Much of what has been written so far about the Arabic Hermetica and Hermetism in Arabic is therefore misleading. It is inappropriate to apply terms, the utility of which is debatable within the study of Greek literature of the Roman period, and which are loaded with connotations derived from the Hermetic movement of early  modern Europe, to early Arabic literature without careful discussion. Calling some- thing Hermetic in this context does more to obscure than to explain its meaning  and history. We are left only with a vague impression of a supposedly distinctive  intellectual movement and increasingly elaborate speculations on the same well- known but inconclusive textual references. The majority of Arabists having no spe- cial expertise in the problems presented by the Hermetica themselves are led by  works such as these to notions of “the infl uence of Hermetism in Islam,” and these have subsequently been repeated in more general works as accepted facts. A survey of the views on Arabic Hermetica on the Internet, including reference works as well as the Web sites of modern alchemists, astrologers, and those of “esoteric” interests, easily found with any search engine, gives an even more disappointing picture of misinformation—often based, however, at least partly on scholarly works like those described above. What is needed is not more pure theorizing about Hermetism in Arabic or in Islam, but studies devoted to the Arabic Hermetica and the Arabic works discussing them, the primary sources themselves which have so far not been subjected to suffi ciently critical scrutiny.

After all this speculation about Arabic Hermetism, it still remains to be shown precisely what the Arabic Hermetic texts themselves say, who used them and how, from where they originated, how they were transmitted, in what sense they are Hermetic, and indeed who Hermes was thought to be and why. To assume the
existence of a special sect of Hermetists who produced the Arabic Hermetica, as has been done with reason for the Greek Hermetica, is not only so far unsupported, but could further confuse the issue by suggesting implicitly the identity of, or at least a  connection between, the ancient Hermetists—whose characteristics and even exis- tence have long been the subject of debate—and the authors of the Arabic Hermetica,  the Arab Hermetists, a modern invention. That is not to say that no such commu- nity in Arabic will ever be discovered, as unlikely as it may be. For the purposes of  this study, however, I am staying close to the texts.

The term Hermetic will be applied only to texts attributed by name to Hermes.

The expression Hermetic tradition is used here only to mean the tradition of textual transmission of writings attributed to Hermes. 59

The terms Hermetism and Hermetists will be avoided as much as possible.

Some defi ciencies in this working defi nition of Hermetic are immediately clear. It excludes much literature that might be related to the Arabic Hermetica but is not attributed to Hermes by name, such as works associated in Arabic with the names Agathodaemon, Asclepius, and Pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana. I have indeed had to  make some exceptions to this defi nition.60 However, given the absence of any well- founded idea of what Hermetic, Hermetist, and Hermetism might mean in the con- text of Arabic literature, I am making these restrictions to give the project some  coherency. One should keep in mind that the term Hermetism did not exist in Arabic literature; other terms and criteria appropriate to this context are needed and remain  to be determined. To move forward, one must discard all of the assumptions com- monly made in modern scholarship and rely as much as possible on primary sources,  not to talk vaguely about Hermetism, but to study the Arabic Hermetica themselves and relevant works contemporary with them. Only later will it be possible to take texts attributed to other fi gures related to Hermes, such as Agathodaemon, into account, and to determine whether a coherent set of doctrines that might be called “Arabic Hermetism” can be found, and whether such a designation will actually help us to understand the history of the texts.

Despite the picture just painted, there are a number of notable and praiseworthy exceptions to the pattern of obfuscation in the study of the Arabic Hermetica during
the last half century. When scholars have dealt directly with the texts themselves, they have made real advances. Such studies are the foundation of everything that follows here, and their importance will be obvious at every stage.61 I have benefi ted much from these predecessors in this work, and I wish to express my debt to them here at the outset.
