edited and studied by Mahé; Armenian authors from the sixth century onward cited it.25 There is also a large number of medieval Latin Hermetica; these need research not only on their contents and doctrines, but also on their relationship to the Hermetica in other languages. Fortunately a new series of studies organized by Paolo  Lucentini under the name Hermes Latinus has appeared, seeking to fi ll this gap, pub- lished in the series Corpus Christianorum: Continuatio Mediaevalis.  26 With the help of these new editions and studies of the European Latin Hermetica of the Middle Ages, one can begin to reach an idea of what was already available in Latin Europe before the Greek Corpus Hermeticum was published in Latin in the late fi fteenth century.

The present book is aimed at the least understood part of Hermetic tradition. There are probably more works attributed to Hermes surviving in Arabic than in any other language, and the majority of them are still unknown and unpublished. Some of them defi nitely derive from ancient Greek sources through translation. Others, like many of the Latin Hermetica, are later works originally composed in Arabic. Yet even where the texts themselves are not of ancient origin, the idea of Hermes is. The problem then is to establish the means and continuity of tradition from the ancient Hermetica, and what people thought about Hermes, to the time of their attestation in Arabic.

The fi rst principle for researchers in Graeco-Arabic studies, as Dimitri Gutas defi ned it, is a matter of common sense: nothing was translated from Greek into Arabic unless it was available in manuscripts to the translators.27 Put differently, the  Arabic reception of works in translation from Greek, as well as from other lan- guages, is a product of the period now generally called late antiquity. It is funda- mental therefore to trace the history of the Hermetica and their reception, insofar as  we can discern them, down to the time of the Arabic translators in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries. One way to sketch the earlier history of the texts is to notice who mentions them and for what purpose. At the same time it is possible to arrive at a general idea of the interest readers had in the Hermetica down to that time.

# 1.2 The Reception of the Greek Hermetica in Antiquity

A complete history of the reception of the Hermetica is still required, but for now a brief chronological outline of the early readership of these texts in antiquity will
