have to suffi ce. What follows is based largely on the useful collection of testimonia  by Scott, completed by A. S. Ferguson; the reader may fi nd complete textual refer- ences there.28 The nature of these testimonia is largely doxographic, so they tell us  mostly about the reception of the philosophical Hermetica by theologians, whose works survive in large number, whereas exceedingly little is known about the history and use of the technical Hermetica. One may assume that works of Hermes on astral divination and the occult properties of substances continued to circulate among scientists and astrologers without hiatus.

We know little for certain about the original community or communities that produced the Greek Hermetica, except that they were pagans in Roman Egypt who saw their teachings as distinctly Egyptian.29 It seems likely to me that they included  members of the Egyptian priesthood.30 Whether one imagines them as a philosoph- ical sect or a religious movement depends on how one defi nes those terms.31 The  earliest external references to Hermes Trismegistus as an authoritative fi gure come into view in early Christian writings of the second and third centuries. Athenagoras (late second cent.) cites a passage of an unknown Hermetic work to support the  well-known antipagan argument that the beings worshipped as gods by the poly- theists were all really men of bygone times. Tertullian (fl . ca 200) points to the limits  of human knowledge when he says that not even Hermes, “the master of all natural philosophers,” could explain the origin of matter. One can see from such a remark that even from the beginnings of the attestation of the Hermetica, authors who knew them believed them to be very ancient. The pseudo-Justin who wrote the Cohortatio ad gentiles (third cent.) provides the earliest citation of what would become Hermes Trismegistus’ most popular words for theologians: “It is diffi cult to  understand God, but for the one who does, he is impossible to describe.” Non- Christians read the Hermetica, too. Around 300, in Egypt, the early alchemist
