Zosimus of Panopolis demonstrated his familiarity with “sacred books” of Hermes and quoted Hermetica in his works, which survive in the original Greek and in  Syriac translation. According to some evidence, works of Hermes were also trans- lated into Middle Persian already in the third century, in the court of the Iranian  emperor Šāpūr I (d. 270), along with works of Ptolemy, Dorotheus, and other astrol- ogers. Chapter 2 deals with this Persian reception of the Hermetica and the attempt  to establish its date.

The Christian Arnobius, at the beginning of the fourth century, included Mercurius (Latin for Hermes) among the pagan philosophers against whom he was arguing. His student Lactantius took a different approach, citing philosophical Greek Hermetica to make the case that God is one and truly above the world. This is the earliest example of what became a common use of the Hermetica: citing the  pagan philosopher Hermes in support of Christian theology. For centuries thereaf- ter, late antique and medieval Christians used the Hermetica for apologetic pur- poses.32 The Hermetic treatise The Perfect Discourse, which survives complete only  in a fourth-century Latin compilation known as Asclepius, contains a prophecy about the lamented decline of Egyptian religion and culture, but it was used by Christian writers to prove that paganism was doomed to extinction. Meanwhile the pagan theurgist who wrote the De mysteriis Aegyptiorum, thought to be Iamblichus,33 also mined the Hermetica for materials suitable to his own pagan theology. The fourth-century Syriac poet Ephraem claimed that the Manichaeans, too, considered Hermes one of their prophet’s forerunners. Coptic translations of Hermetica are found in the Nag< Ḥammādī codices from the mid-fourth century, showing that  Egyptian sages read Hermetica in translation in their own language. The fi fth- century anthology of literature and wisdom of the pagan Stobaeus includes some of  the most important extant Greek Hermetica. Hypatia’s father, Theon of Alexandria (fl . ca 364), is supposed to have taught the astronomical works of Hermes, and her friend Synesius, bishop of Cyrene, listed Hermes as one of the four greatest sages of  ancient times. Hermes appears at the end of the sixth century in more generic col- lections of the sayings of ancient philosophers in Greek and in Syriac. The Syriac  collection is especially interesting because it is directed against the obstinately pagan inhabitants of the Syrian city Ḥarrān (Carrhae). (On this work, see section 3.4.1, page 83 in this volume.) In the early fi fth century, Cyril of Alexandria had used Hermes to similar effect in his book refuting the emperor Julian and his treatise against the Christians.

Such a rapid survey cannot do justice to the use and abuse of the Hermetica in  their reception. Each author had his own purposes in using Hermes for an argu- ment, and these need to be understood individually according to their proper con- texts. What should be clear, however, from the collection of these references is that
