Hermetica, not all of which survive today, were read, excerpted, and appreciated  widely during the third, fourth, and fi fth centuries, and applied to a variety of ten- dentious theological arguments often not in harmony with their original purposes.  The Hermetica had authority as seemingly authentic documents of an ancient Egyptian wisdom, and that authority is what made them valuable to authors beyond the unknown Egyptians that produced them. It is not clear, however, how many readers really saw the Hermetica directly themselves, as opposed to mere citations handed down through other authors or excerpts in anthologies. Moreover, as Fowden puts it, the “way of Hermes” created and followed by the Roman Egyptian authors of the Hermetica might have been “appreciated outside Egypt, as by Iamblichus, but was not so far as we know put into practice.”34 In other words, the Hermetica really had become documents of a philosophical and spiritual training the specifi cs of which belonged to a bygone era. After the fourth century, there is no  more sign of a living community of devoted successors to the “original” Graeco- Egyptian authors and students of the Hermetica.35

References to Hermetica as authoritative sources of theological arguments con- tinued to appear even when Byzantine power was replaced by the Arab kingdom in  the Middle East during the seventh century. For example, by the year 700, Jacob of Edessa quoted with approval the views of Hermes Trismegistus on God’s creation of the sun in his Syriac Hexaemeron.  36 In this case it is unlikely that he was familiar with Hermetica directly. Probably he found these passages in the treatise of Cyril just mentioned. Yet for him, it was worth citing Hermes to make a point. Also by this time someone had translated the philosophical defi nitions of Hermes into Armenian.37 Hermes had become a mysterious ancient sage, whose wise words of higher understanding were known partly from citations and were used to bolster religious arguments. He was known in many languages at different times: Greek, Latin, Syriac, Coptic, Armenian, and Middle Persian.

The Arabic reception of Hermes, as an idea and an author, began in the eighth  century, in a world very different from that in which the Hermetica had fi rst circu- lated. By that time the Byzantine polity was reduced to parts of Anatolia and the  Balkans, replaced everywhere else by the new Arab empire of unprecedented size.  There was a new ruling religion, as well as a new common language, and a new tra- dition of scholarship was taking shape. To understand the Arabic Hermes, it is nec- essary to have some idea of the larger context of this early Arabic scholarship.
