# 1.3 The Birth of Arabic Scholarship and the Book of the Ancients in Bagdad

The Arab conquests and the resulting empire have been treated in many studies, and historians have proposed many theories, not all of them mutually compatible, to  explain these momentous events. Readers new to the subject will fi nd excellent nar- rative overviews elsewhere.38 What follows here is only the briefest possible back- ground to orient readers unfamiliar with the world of letters in which the Arabic  Hermetica fi rst appear.

The 620s and 630s were marked by devastating wars between the Persian and East Roman Empires and by apocalyptic sentiments across the Eastern Mediterranean and Southwest Asia. In these decades, the diverse populations of Arabia united as a new community following the teaching of the prophet Muḥammad of Mecca, who warned through his revelation of God’s imminent judgment at the end of the world  and offered divine laws to his community. After Muḥammad’s death, his commu- nity followed the prophet’s successors, the caliphs. Sedentary and pastoralist alike,  the Arabian peoples, along with allies joining them at every stage, collaborated in the conquest of one half of the former Roman Empire and the entire Sasanian Persian Empire, both of which had weakened defenses after the previous three  decades of intense warfare. The Arab conquests of the lands from the Iberian pen- insula to Central Asia were not nearly as rapid as some histories make them seem,  but were carried out through several generations of institutionalized warfare. The conquerors had to adapt to new and different physical and social environments and to manage their ever-increasing wealth, property on a scale totally unfamiliar to  their recent ancestors. This fi rst century (the seventh to eighth centuries ce) there- fore brought many changes to the Arabic-speaking populations now scattered in a  far-reaching diaspora as a ruling élite. The pattern of caliphal succession, though always contested, especially by supporters of leaders from the family of the prophet, became in the fi rst century essentially dynastic under the Umayyads, a different albeit related family, and the caliphs became effectively kings of an immense empire. The religion of the community following Muḥammad came soon to be defi ned as Islām—a term that had earlier referred to conversion Muḥammad’s community— but its doctrines, law, and theology were still only beginning to take their canonical shapes. Arabic remained the language of the Muslims. By offi cial order Arabic replaced other languages as the medium of administration across all the conquered territory around the year 700. The process was not accomplished overnight, but it was nevertheless the new policy to use Arabic in government and administration.
