In 750 the Umayyad dynasty of caliphs, weakened by factionalism, was over- thrown by the Abbāsids, who claimed to represent better the family of the prophet  and who were backed by strong supporters from the prosperous and relatively recently conquered distant provinces of eastern Iran and Central Asia, territories that had previously been outside even the Sasanian Empire. These Abbāsid caliphs were distinguished from their predecessors in following older models of Iranian kingship. One way in which they did this was to encourage scholarship and to fund  scholars, particularly where it could promote their own authority and the prosper- ity of their administration. For example, the caliphs required astrologers, not only  to advise them on the most favorable times for new undertakings, but also to dem- onstrate that Abbāsid power was determined by long-established patterns in the  heavens. Mathematics and medicine had their obvious practical applications. The patronage of and participation in scholarship became an increasingly prestigious and normal interest for members of the caliphal court and the privileged classes under the Abbāsids. In this patronage they employed many non-Arabs, including many scholars learned both in Arabic and in the languages of their communities of origin, such as Persian, Greek, and Aramaic.

The foundation of the new capital of Baġdād in 762, about twenty miles upstream from the former Persian capital, represented the Abbāsid al-Manṣūr’s centralizing  policies and physically brought together populations from all regions and ethnici- ties of the far-fl ung empire, representing many different creeds. The pace of conver- sion to Islam by members of the conquered populations, who now played a greater  role in the administration of government, rapidly increased in the following cen- tury. Many converts had to learn Arabic prayers;39 regardless of their fi rst language,  when their children were schooled, they learned Arabic writing and memorized  Arabic scripture and verse, often attaining fl uency. Arabic became the normal inter- communal medium of learned discussion, as the languages of conquering colonists  have repeatedly done in history. The class of literate bureaucrats, many of them of non-Arab background from both the former Roman and Persian empires, grew  larger and created a new, urbane literature and richly developed sciences of gram- mar and religious tradition, all in Arabic. The introduction of paper technology,  almost simultaneous with the rise of the Abbāsids, facilitated the composition and compilation of written works on multivolume scales previously unknown in the days of the much more expensive parchment. In such circumstances, in which intense intercultural contact in a new arena coincided with a sharply rising regard  for advanced scientifi c learning, patrons commissioned a huge number of transla- tions from the literary languages of those ruled—primarily Greek, Aramaic, and  Persian—into the language of the rulers. Arabic, spoken by the Muslim kings and all
