their followers, eclipsed competition in the public life of Muslim urban centers. Book traditions in languages such as Middle Persian and Aramaic were preserved for later ages only among religious scholars in their particular communities.

Of course, Arabic literature, oral and written, was never truly separate from con- tact with other literatures and translation. The Qur>ān itself retells stories from bib- lical and other literature that its audience was expected to know. What makes the  Abbāsid literary effl orescence remarkable is its scale, including the scale of transla- tion, the widespread support for translation, and the prestige of the translated  works. Translation was a full-time profession for a select few, well paid by rich  patrons. Several translators became enduringly famous for their work. The trans- lated texts became models for all later writings on the subjects they covered, stan- dards to emulate, react against, or build upon. In a word, they became classical, but  exclusively in the new language. They were not studied in their original, now obso- lete, languages.40

The Arabic Hermes appears in this context of fresh exchange, in which authors in many fi elds of study and inquiry from many different ethnic backgrounds and countries met together, all using Arabic, in the young capital city of the largest empire the world had ever seen. Hermes is cited as an ancient authority already in  the eighth century in some of the earliest known Arabic scientifi c works, the writ- ings of Iranian court astrologers of the Abbāsids. In the ninth century, Hermes  came to be considered in Arabic literature as not just an ancient scientifi c authority,  but an antediluvian prophet whose revelation formed the very beginnings of sci- ence. His works were therefore thought to have been transmitted from the extremely  distant past as a part of the heritage of the ancient world, recovered by Muslim scholars in this great epoch of translations. With respect to the chronological error— the attribution of very ancient dates to the works of Hermes—the reception of Hermetica in Arabic bears close resemblance to the Western European reception of the Hermetica that began in the fi fteenth century. This is not fortuitous, for the European concept of Hermes Trismegistus as a very ancient sage was derived from Arabic tradition as well as from the Church Fathers.41 The Arabic Hermetica appeared in the midst of the bloom of Arabic literature in every fi eld of human inquiry.
