There are very many classical Arabic works attributed to Hermes registered today  in the world’s manuscript catalogs,42 including treatises on magical talismans, astrol- ogy, and alchemy, and ranging in length from short works of a single page to books  of a couple of hundred. Just six of these texts have been published (dealing with astrology, alchemy, talismans, and snake venom), and only a few of them have known origins.43 At least two of the Arabic Hermetica are certainly translations  from Middle Persian, one of which at least is in turn based on known Greek mate- rial.44 Another is a translation from Greek, perhaps a direct translation.45 Where did  the rest of the Arabic Hermetica come from and who wrote them? Perhaps more of the Arabic Hermetica will turn out to be translations of Greek originals, even works lost in the original. Each text promises potentially to preserve in Arabic material deriving from Greek as early as the third century. The history of these Arabic Hermetica within Arabic tradition itself will require extensive study, as well: Hermes is cited or discussed in at least seventy individual Arabic works by different authors from Andalusia to India, dating from the eighth to the eighteenth century; this is based only on preliminary gleanings of the bibliographical sources.46 The massive Arabic Hermetic tradition—if the use and reuse of Hermes as an authority can be called Hermetic tradition—still awaits its modern students.

# 1.4 Understanding the Terms hermetic and Hermeticsm in the Arabic Context

Before going on, it is necessary to deal with a problem of defi nition. In modern scholarly usage, the terms Hermetic and Hermetism are both used to refer to several totally different things in various traditions in different languages and periods. One author uses these terms to refer to anything seeming esoteric, whereas another uses it to refer to anything having to do with alchemy. Another calls any work that even mentions Hermes in passing Hermetic, and still other uses of the word confuse the matter more. These names have been employed in so many ways that there cannot
