be any consensus among scholars today about what works can be considered as Hermetica. Is a work Hermetic if it deals with alchemy, or merely if it claims to be a secret text revealed to an elect few? Sometimes Hermetism is treated as a literary genre, and other times it seems to describe a supposed doctrine. Some modern  authors also refer to the Hermetists, meaning those who followed an alleged doc- trine set out in Hermetic works or who practiced Hermetic disciplines. What they  practiced is usually called Hermetism, as if they held a defi nite and specifi c doctrine, yet the nature of this Hermetism has not been adequately addressed in discussion. Even when European alchemists during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries self-consciously describe their doctrines as hermetic, the meaning of the term for them is not entirely clear.47 Yet the terms, as historians employ them, are crucially important, because the moment we use them, we implicitly assert historical and social realities behind them and propose distinctive categories where there may have been none.

The debate about the social reality behind the ancient Greek Hermetica in Egypt has lasted for a long time. Richard Reitzenstein, for example, wanted to see a school or community of Hermetists as the source of the Greek Hermetica.48 This idea was  rejected by the authoritative Festugière as groundless. Instead, he argued that attri- bution to Hermes was just a feature of a literary genre of the Roman Empire in the  fi rst centuries of the Common Era. Thus works attributed to Hermes could be grouped together with similar works falsely attributed to other legendary sages such as Zoroaster.49 Nevertheless, he did not hesitate to use the word hermétisme to describe the doctrines of the Hermetica. Despite Festugière’s criticism, the idea of Hermetists as a historical group in Roman Egypt has been championed by several  later scholars, and this now seems to have been victorious. One of the main argu- ments of Garth Fowden’s The Egyptian Hermes is that there were ancient Hermetists  as such practicing a Hermetism as such, and that the Greek Corpus Hermeticum represents their coherent school of thought. Although he did not state explicitly  exactly when these Hermetists are supposed to have been practicing their way, testi- monia of the discourses of Hermes (the “philosophical” Hermetica) would point to  the second or third century. I fi nd Fowden’s arguments about the character of the circles of spiritual aspirants who produced these texts mostly convincing, though, as he himself admits, his conclusions necessarily involve some uncertainty.50 But even  if we concede that the term Hermetists is suitable to describe the authors and origi- nal readers of the ancient Hermetica, what do we do with the name when we try to  describe the Arabic Hermetica, half a millennium later and more, the doctrines and practices described within them, as well as their authors and readers?
