supposedly oppressive “orthodox” Muslims, who, it appears, uniformly hate Hermetists, even though Hermes came to be regarded by Muslims as a prophet.56 Another approach has been to apply the defi nition of the Hermetic genre created by Festugière for the Greek Hermetica to Arabic literature.57 Festugière’s defi nition of  “the hermetic” was, however, fundamentally tied to the motif of revelation of a hid- den text. Consequently, it is of little value in the context of the literature of Muslims,  whose very scripture, the Qur>ān, would have to be described as Hermetic on the  same grounds.58 Characteristic of all such studies is a total or near total lack of atten- tion to the books actually attributed to Hermes in Arabic, not to mention the chron- ological order of hundreds of years of sources.

Much of what has been written so far about the Arabic Hermetica and Hermetism in Arabic is therefore misleading. It is inappropriate to apply terms, the utility of which is debatable within the study of Greek literature of the Roman period, and which are loaded with connotations derived from the Hermetic movement of early  modern Europe, to early Arabic literature without careful discussion. Calling some- thing Hermetic in this context does more to obscure than to explain its meaning  and history. We are left only with a vague impression of a supposedly distinctive  intellectual movement and increasingly elaborate speculations on the same well- known but inconclusive textual references. The majority of Arabists having no spe- cial expertise in the problems presented by the Hermetica themselves are led by  works such as these to notions of “the infl uence of Hermetism in Islam,” and these have subsequently been repeated in more general works as accepted facts. A survey of the views on Arabic Hermetica on the Internet, including reference works as well as the Web sites of modern alchemists, astrologers, and those of “esoteric” interests, easily found with any search engine, gives an even more disappointing picture of misinformation—often based, however, at least partly on scholarly works like those described above. What is needed is not more pure theorizing about Hermetism in Arabic or in Islam, but studies devoted to the Arabic Hermetica and the Arabic works discussing them, the primary sources themselves which have so far not been subjected to suffi ciently critical scrutiny.

After all this speculation about Arabic Hermetism, it still remains to be shown precisely what the Arabic Hermetic texts themselves say, who used them and how, from where they originated, how they were transmitted, in what sense they are Hermetic, and indeed who Hermes was thought to be and why. To assume the
