existence of a special sect of Hermetists who produced the Arabic Hermetica, as has been done with reason for the Greek Hermetica, is not only so far unsupported, but could further confuse the issue by suggesting implicitly the identity of, or at least a  connection between, the ancient Hermetists—whose characteristics and even exis- tence have long been the subject of debate—and the authors of the Arabic Hermetica,  the Arab Hermetists, a modern invention. That is not to say that no such commu- nity in Arabic will ever be discovered, as unlikely as it may be. For the purposes of  this study, however, I am staying close to the texts.

The term Hermetic will be applied only to texts attributed by name to Hermes.

The expression Hermetic tradition is used here only to mean the tradition of textual transmission of writings attributed to Hermes. 59

The terms Hermetism and Hermetists will be avoided as much as possible.

Some defi ciencies in this working defi nition of Hermetic are immediately clear. It excludes much literature that might be related to the Arabic Hermetica but is not attributed to Hermes by name, such as works associated in Arabic with the names Agathodaemon, Asclepius, and Pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana. I have indeed had to  make some exceptions to this defi nition.60 However, given the absence of any well- founded idea of what Hermetic, Hermetist, and Hermetism might mean in the con- text of Arabic literature, I am making these restrictions to give the project some  coherency. One should keep in mind that the term Hermetism did not exist in Arabic literature; other terms and criteria appropriate to this context are needed and remain  to be determined. To move forward, one must discard all of the assumptions com- monly made in modern scholarship and rely as much as possible on primary sources,  not to talk vaguely about Hermetism, but to study the Arabic Hermetica themselves and relevant works contemporary with them. Only later will it be possible to take texts attributed to other fi gures related to Hermes, such as Agathodaemon, into account, and to determine whether a coherent set of doctrines that might be called “Arabic Hermetism” can be found, and whether such a designation will actually help us to understand the history of the texts.

Despite the picture just painted, there are a number of notable and praiseworthy exceptions to the pattern of obfuscation in the study of the Arabic Hermetica during
