# The Arabic Hermes

## From Pagan Sage to Prophet of Science

## Kevin van Bladel

## IBSN: 978-0-19-537613-5

Early arabic accounts tell of an ancient egyptian sage named Hermes Triplicate-in-Wisdom, the founder of the pagan religion before the great Flood, a lawgiver who ascended to the heavenly spheres of the planets and  returned to teach astrology, a true prophet like Jesus and Muḥammad. The teach- ings of this wise Hermes circulated in Arabic translation, having been handed down,  as the accounts said, over long ages by the great philosophers of the past, such as Aristotle and Apollonius of Tyana, or after being rediscovered inscribed on tablets in subterranean chambers of Egyptian ruins. The Arabic books of Hermes claim to  explain the hidden workings of the universe, the secrets of creation, and the myster- ies of nature. They offer means to predict the future from astral omens, instructions  for the manufacture of potent talismans, and encrypted directions for manufactur- ing the elixir of the alchemists. To this day many of these works survive intact, wait- ing for modern readers in dozens of Arabic manuscripts. Most of them have never  been printed.

Both the legends about Hermes and the works attributed to him in Arabic pres- ent complicated puzzles for the historian. They are part of the rich product of late  antiquity out of which early Arabic culture, in all its aspects, grew, and one piece of the enormous body of knowledge translated into Arabic from the books of the ancients (as they called them), on which much of Arabic literature was based. To  unravel this tradition of many strands is a manifold task. It is not enough to under- stand the Arabic context, even if that alone is diffi cult and the subject of ongoing  research. One must also look back to the ancient background from which the Arabic  Hermetica came into being, and forward to their celebrated reception in fi fteenth- and sixteenth-century Europe, which has endowed them with a special importance  for modern scholarship in European languages. At the same time, interest in the Hermetica reached far beyond Europe, where there are totally unexplored avenues of research and untold histories. Works of Hermes never known in Europe were copied and studied from Morocco to India, surviving today in mosque collections and national and private libraries of North Africa and Asia. For example, as late as
