the nineteenth century, an Iranian intellectual could still fi nd it worth his while to translate an alchemical revelation of Hermes claiming ancient Egyptian origins from Arabic into his mother tongue, Persian.1  When the British government of India purchased the remains of the Royal Library of the fallen Muġal Emperors in  Delhi in 1859, there were Arabic works of Hermes among those thousands of vol- umes.2  What these Hermetic texts, and the fi gure of Hermes Trismegistus himself, meant to their numerous audiences in far-fl ung lands remains to be discovered. It is  certain, however, that the European Hermetic movement that began in the late fi f- teenth century is only one part of something much greater, at the center of which,  geographically and chronologically, is the Arabic tradition.

## 1.1 The Ancient Greek Hermetica of Roman Egypt and their European Reception

Sometime in the fi rst centuries of the Common Era, certain anonymous sages in Roman Egypt, apparently over several generations, wrote treatises on science and philosophy in Greek while professing to be part of a distinctly Egyptian tradition.3 A number of these works portray dialogues between various Egyptian gods, some  given Greek names and others retaining their Egyptian names. The principal char- acter in these texts is Hermes, the Greek syncretic equivalent of the Egyptian god of  knowledge and writing, Thoth. Hermes usually appears as the teacher of the other characters in the dialogues, including Tat, Ammon, and Asclepius. From the main teacher we take the name of the texts as a group: Hermetica, writings having to do with Hermes. The Hermes here is often dubbed Sqirlå cirso|, Trismegistus, the “thrice-greatest,” an epithet in loan translation from an old Egyptian title of Thoth, found fi rst in Greek in the usage of Egyptian priests of the Ptolemaic period as lå cirso| ja≠ låcirso| heø| lå ca|, “greatest and greatest great god.”4  In this way the Egyptian Hermes is distinguished from the mischievous Olympian messenger god Hermes of Greek mythology.

The Greek Hermetica of Roman Egypt deal with a wide range of topics, includ- ing astrology, cosmology, and medicine. They describe a philosophical education,  revealed by Hermes and others on the basis of divine insights, through which his disciples could know and understand the soul, the universe, and God. Garth Fowden has neatly summarized the cosmos taught in the Hermetica:

> God is one, and the creator of all things, which continue to depend on God as elements in a hierarchy of beings. Second in this hierarchy after God 
