> himself comes the intelligible world, and then the sensible world. The cre- ative and benefi cent powers of God fl ow through the intelligible and sensible  realms to the sun, which is the demiurge around which revolve the eight spheres of the fi xed stars, the planets and the earth.5  From these spheres depend the daemons, and from the daemons Man, who is a microcosm of  creation. Thus everything is part of God, and God is in everything, his cre- ative activity continuing unceasingly. All things are one and the pleroma of  being is indestructible.6

Human beings are constrained in the hierarchy of cosmic sympathies and subject to the force of the daemons; that is, they are bound in the cosmos by fate. Altogether, these ideas were not unique to the authors of the Hermetica. One could say they were, in varying forms, popular ideas around the Mediterranean under Roman rule. But what makes the Hermetica special is their response to the situation of humans in the world. The Egyptian Hermes imparts two kinds of knowledge in his books. First, it is possible to gain a degree of power in and control over the terrestrial world  through a knowledge of the sympathetic harmony of the celestial forces with par- ticular terrestrial things. Thus Hermes teaches, for example, the interpretation of  heavenly signs for the prognostication of the future, as well as the occult properties of substances, such as different plants, and the astral powers they possess from their planetary sympathies. Modern scholars have called such treatises technical because they explain techniques for the application of the knowledge of the principles and forces at work in the universe to daily life and practical problems. Second, and more famously, Hermes teaches his disciples in the dialogues how to transcend their bodily  circumstances and to overcome fate through purifi cation of the intellect and con- templation, leading to a true knowledge of God.7  Much of the appeal in the dis- courses of Hermes lies in this promise of higher knowledge of a greater, divine self  liberated from worldly conditions through a developed understanding, and this goal must partly have motivated the anonymous community that composed these texts.

The Greek Hermetica best known today are of the latter type, the philosophical dialogues. They came to the attention of scholars in the Latin tradition of Western Europe in 1460, when a monk named Leonardo brought a manuscript of Greek Hermetic texts to Cosimo de’ Medici in Florence from somewhere in Macedonia.8 The scholar Marsilio Ficino was asked to set aside his translation of the works of Plato and to give precedence to Hermes, who was thought to be much more ancient
