than the classical Greek authors. His translation was published in 1471, and over the next century and a half this Latin version of the Greek Hermetica went through twenty-fi ve editions.9  The editio princeps of the Greek original was produced by Adrianus Turnebus in 1554. Greeted with extraordinary interest, the Greek Hermetica were thought during this period to derive from before the great Flood or at least to be contemporary with Moses, and to represent the primordial, original wellspring of philosophy. They were therefore regarded as authorities on a par with the book of Genesis, a discovery of utmost importance. Renaissance authors used them as source texts for a new movement that blended Neoplatonism, Jewish Cabbala, and the teachings of the Hermetica into a system of thought called Hermetism today. Historians have amply documented the deep infl uence of these works on scholars in Western Europe from the end of the fi fteenth through the seventeenth century, and more marginally thereafter until the present.10

The beginning of the end of Hermetic popularity was in 1614, when Isaac Casaubon showed that the Greek Hermetica were not so ancient as had been thought, but rather were apparently derivative products of the early Christian era. Although his arguments did not become widely known immediately, the prestige of the Hermetica declined markedly by the end of the century as Casaubon’s research had its effect.11 Hermann Conring, a professor of medicine at the University of Helmstedt, argued in 1648 against the claims to a Hermetic legacy made by the alchemist followers of Paracelsus.12 Casaubon, Conring, and others after them effectively dispelled the aura of primordial authenticity around the Hermetica themselves as well as the supposed ongoing heritage of those texts. Following these and other attacks, the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries  witnessed a low ebb of interest in the Hermetica, though Egyptomaniacs, alche- mists, members of secret societies, and those involved in currents of esoteric  thought continued to use and study them. Between 1630 and 1856 there were no new editions or reprints of the Greek text of the Hermetica brought to light by  Ficino, a sure sign of attenuated scholarly interest.13 The Hermetic movement cre- ated in the sixteenth century diminished greatly during the subsequent period of  “scientifi c revolution,” when scholars relied less and less on ancient writings for scientifi c authority.

It was only with the new methods and purposes of classical scholarship devel- oped in the nineteenth century that the Greek Hermetica found a restored place in
