respected research, now not as sources of inspiration and esoteric teachings but as historical artifacts to be fi tted into a detailed and comprehensive record of Greek and Roman “civilizations,” then a new framework of study. For some practitioners  of the newly developing fi eld of religious studies, the Hermetica became docu- ments of an alleged perennial philosophy and sources for structuralist schemes.  The occultists of the Romantic and Modern eras also found their own interest in these texts.

For much of the twentieth century the scholarly effort to explain the Hermetica as products of a historical context remained inconclusive. The debate about them effectively centered on determining to which “nation” they belonged, whether they were essentially Greek and therefore European or “Western,” or Egyptian and Oriental and therefore foreign, and secondarily on whether or not a particular defi ned community produced them. If a group of authors could be found, then ascertaining their relationship to other religious movements, construed broadly as Judaism, Christianity, Gnosticism, and paganism, would help to give them their historical place. (Today these broad categories seem somewhat simplistic.) The monumental labor of Festugière in the 1940s and ’50s seemed to show defi nitively that the Hermetica were, in fact, totally Hellenistic in content and form and owed nothing essential to non-Greek cultures. He wrote four volumes to prove his point.14

In the late 1970s and the 1980s, studies by Jean-Pierre Mahé and Garth Fowden argued that there is indeed something distinctively Egyptian in them, and that they can be really understood only when we place them in the context of Hellenistic Egypt and indigenous Egyptian cultural tradition.15 Mahé hypothesized that the Greek texts are descendants of the Egyptian genre of aphoristic instructions.16 Fowden showed convincingly that one cannot understand the genesis of the Hermetica without locating them within the social contexts of Roman Egypt. His well-documented arguments make the Hermetica neither essentially Greek nor  Egyptian but the product of a Roman Egyptian society that had synthesized prac- tices and ideas current in both of these linguistic, cultural, and religious traditions,  a society that must be understood without an easy separation of “Greek” and “Egyptian” characteristics. It seems safe to say that our present understanding of the Greek Hermetica stands with Fowden.
