known as the Asclepius, and other related fragments), for it is these texts that enjoyed such celebrity when they came to the attention of early modern Europeans. However, there are quite a few more works attributed to Hermes surviving in Greek than just these philosophical discourses, contrary to the implication in the authority- granting and comprehensive-sounding title Corpus.  20 Although specialists do take them all into account, the recent English translations of the Corpus Hermeticum do not include the important and substantial Greek excerpts of Hermetic dialogues found in the Stobaean Anthology.  21 The Greek texts attributed to Hermes dealing with omens, the use of the occult properties of substances, and related practices—as opposed to theoretical discussions, philosophy, and descriptions of meditations such as those found in the Greek Corpus Hermeticum—are even more neglected, practically unknown. The modern view of the Greek Hermetica is largely focused on a limited section of what was and indeed is still available.22

Understanding the Hermetica requires also that works attributed to Hermes in languages other than Greek be taken into account, and again specialists have not failed to notice them. The Coptic translations of Greek Hermetica, discovered in the Nag< Ḥammādī codices, have by now received much well-deserved attention.23 Some of these Hermetica in Coptic do not survive in their original Greek, and they were not published until the 1970s. One of these previously unknown texts is a dialogue in which Trismegistus initiates his disciple into the ineffable mysteries of the mind, instructing him to inscribe the teaching in hieroglyphic characters and to head the text with an oath to protect its contents from misuse. The Coptic codex also includes a substantial portion of the Perfect Discourse, surviving also in the Latin translation known as Asclepius. The latter version has attracted students in the Latin tradition in ancient, medieval, and modern times.24 The Armenian Hermetic text called The Defi nitions of Hermes, translated from Greek and with later interpolations, has been
