Greek/Christian negativity Derrida is willing to talk about and the  Jewish/Islamic versions he feels he cannot? Is Derrida hinting at a cer- tain deconstructive success in Jewish and Sufi mysticism, a success not  to be confused with their Greek/Christian counterparts and all their Hellenized dependency on the logos and the epekeina tes ousia? Or, on the contrary, does Derrida believe the Jewish/Islamic traditions he is unfamiliar with to be just as metaphysically vulnerable as the Greek/Christian negativity he so confidently deconstructs?

Derrida’s allusion to the famous last line of Wittgenstein’s Tractatus (Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darüber muss man schweigen) remains unclear – why is the ‘immense place’ of Judaism and Islam so unspeakable? What gives it special treatment? The ‘unspeakable’  (Unaussprechliches) the young Wittgenstein referred to was a very un- Derridean unspeakability, a place outside the world of facts and things –  it seems unlikely that Derrida would use such a transcendental space to locate a genuine alternative to the Greek/Christian paradigm. If the meaning of Derrida’s ‘cannot speak’ lies in the fact that the author does  not ‘belong’ to the traditions he has chosen to pass over, then the omis- sion becomes even more curious: an Algerian Jew who feels ‘at home’  writing about a Syrian monk, a German Dominican and a Bavarian phenomenologist, but hesitant in offering comments upon his own (albeit abandoned) faith – or, for that matter, on an Islamic tradition (Ibn Masarrah, Ibn 2Arabi, Ibn Rushd) based to a large extent in Moorish Spain, in the very ‘Christian Europe’ Derrida has quite rightly critiqued elsewhere.

So what is the real reason for Derrida’s decision ‘not to speak’ of Jewish and Islamic traditions, in his counter-deconstruction of negative theology (for this is what ‘Denials’ is, fundamentally)? Why does  Derrida choose to stay in Christian Europe? Perhaps there are no com- plex reasons, but only straightforward ones: maybe Derrida simply  doesn’t know enough about the School of Gerona or the Sefer ha-bahir or Ibn 2Arabi or Mevlana or Suhrawardi. Perhaps he can’t read Arabic or Aramaic. Perhaps he was too enticed by the possible genealogy of three figures such as Pseudo-Dionysius, Eckhart and Heidegger (each of whom has read his predecessor) to wander off into the strange deserts of Kabbalism or Persian esotericism. There may even be the possibility  that Derrida, in a distinctly underconstructed moment of political cor- rectness, was more attracted by the deconstruction of a European  Christian tradition than a non-European Islamic/Judaic one; after all his talk of ‘a Europe united in Christianity’ and the ‘logocentric impasse of European domesticity’,13 perhaps Derrida felt a more pressing need to
