deconstruct Euro-Christian logocentrisms rather than their Islamic or Jewish equivalents.

This all sounds rather cynical, and perhaps unjustly so. Whatever the reasons for Derrida choosing not to talk about Islamic mysticism, one  thing remains clear: Derrida provides the sort of explanation only a neg- ative theologian would offer. His silence, we are told, is the most ‘con- sistent possible apophasis’ he can offer on the question of Islam. Which  does suggest, unkindly or not, that ‘Islamic traditions’ belong to some- thing far too radically autre for a French post-structuralist to write about.  Islam becomes the unspeakable Other once again, an Other simply out of place in any critique of Christian negative theology.

We will try to show, in response to this, how the work of Ibn 2Arabi, far from being some obscure Sufi esotericism encrypted in mystical Eastern terminology, actually asks the same questions and moves in some similar directions as a number of familiar figures in the West. Ibn 2Arabi’s mistrust of rational/metaphysical thought, his awareness of the creative power of language, his keen understanding of the reliance of identity upon difference, his sophisticated hermeneutics and re-evaluation of selfhood... all allow him similarities with key figures in the Western philosophical tradition. Which is why the invisible presence of Meister  Eckhart (1260–1327) makes itself felt throughout this book as a phan- tom third figure in our comparative study of Derrida and Ibn 2Arabi.  There are two reasons for this: not only is Eckhart the figure most often associated in the West with Ibn 2Arabi, he is also the figure most often associated by Derrida with negative theology.

Ibn 2Arabi has been called, by one critic, the ‘Meister Eckhart of the  Islamic tradition’.14 A surprising number of Western studies and transla- tions of Ibn 2Arabi mention Eckhart in passing (see in particular Dom  Sylvester Houdehard), whilst scholars like Ralph Austin even speak of ‘striking resemblances’. Even without having read a word of either thinker’s works, it is not difficult to see why so many scholars seem to link them together. Two thinkers who both attempt a radical synthesis of  the mystical with the philosophical – and who subsequently suffer per- secution from the authorities as a result; who embark upon lengthy  pilgrimages/journeys, lasting years (Seville to Damascus, Erfurt to Avignon); two figures who draw their own set of disciples after them (Suso, Tauler, Davud Al1Qayseri, al-Qashani) to comment upon their  works and disseminate their ideas. Even the modern critical debates con- cerning the two are analogous – arguments over both thinkers’ orthodoxy  and their denominational status (Shi1ia or Sunni? Catholic or early precedent of the Reformation?), the same allegations of pantheism, the
