considered together: economic history, the history of economic thought, and the history of science. The goal of integrating the findings in these areas determines the structure of this work. In chapter 1, I provide  definitions of monetization, market development, and monetary con- sciousness that are followed throughout the work. I then consider the  progress of monetization and the level that market organization had achieved in England and France by the middle of the fourteenth century. The chapter concludes with details from the biographies of leading fourteenth-century natural philosophers, illustrating their involvement in a range of administrative duties that brought them into close contact with the economic life of their society.

Scholastic philosophers inhabited an intellectual universe as well as a  social universe. Authoritative texts and contemporary philosophical de- bates framed and mediated their social experience. Knowledge of the rich  tradition of scholastic writing on economic subjects is essential to under- standing how scholastic thinkers ‘‘experienced’’ the new dynamic of the  monetized marketplace. In chapters 2 through 5 I investigate the scholas- tic literature on money and market exchange, considering both the  authoritative texts inherited on these subjects and the important additions and corrections made to these texts in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

Chapter 2 considers Aristotle’s detailed discussion of money and econ- omic exchange in Book V of the Nicomachean Ethics. Aristotle’s concep- tion of economic exchange as a dynamic process of equalization, one that  could be represented both as a mathematical equation and as a geometric  figure, had great influence on scholastic economic thinking. His mar- kedly mathematical, geometrical, and relativist treatment of exchange  provided an important textual ground for the later linking of scholastic economic thought with proto-scientific speculation.

In chapter 3 I consider the two earliest and most influential commenta- ries on Aristotle’s Ethics: those of Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.  These commentaries reveal the understanding, acceptance, and even expansion of Aristotle’s sophisticated analysis of money and exchange by Christian thinkers of the middle of the thirteenth century. They provide as well the point against which we can measure the rapid development of money and market consciousness from the late thirteenth century.

Chapter  is divided into two parts, both of which are concerned with the central question of equality and equalization in exchange. The first part considers the definition of equality in writings on usury and just price theory from the earliest church councils through the thirteenth century.  The second part follows the history of the changing philosophical con- ception of equality and equalization through the late thirteenth century:
