natural philosophy. It is, I believe, within this fertile area of connection between perceptions of a dynamic, monetized society and perceptions of a dynamic nature that philosophers created the conceptual landscape within which Western science later developed.

In discussing the complex relationship between economic and proto- scientific thought in the fourteenth century, a question arises concerning  the direction in which the insights flowed. Were they insights originally derived to make sense of pressing new economic and social realities that were then applied to the understanding of the natural world, or were they insights developed within the philosophical and intellectual tradition of the schools that were then applied to the understanding of economic problems? This question cannot be answered unconditionally. Clearly  there was influence in both directions.26 The very act of creating concep- tual models rested on the existence of a sophisticated university culture,  proficient in the exercise of logic and criticism, and confident in its powers of creative speculation. But, while allowing for the strength of scholastic culture, my study of particular intersections between economic and proto-scientific thought has led me to conclude that the creative impulse behind the fertile new models of measurement, relation, and  equalization emerging within the schools came largely from the experi- ence and comprehension of unsettling social and economic develop- ments that were transforming the society beyond the schools.27

The interchange between economic and scientific perceptions is con- sidered at many points in the following chapters. Taken together they  provide an outline of a mechanism of transference between the scholar’s conception of the social world and his conception of the natural world, between his insights into the working of a monetized society and his insights into the working of a newly quantifiable and measurable nature.  To scholastic thinkers influenced by Roman and canon law and Aris- totle’s analysis of exchange in Ethics V, the monetized marketplace came  to be perceived as a dynamic system of equalization, governed by its own proper mathematics and logic. Take exchangers with unequal needs exchanging unequal products at crossed purposes (each wanting to buy  cheap and to sell dearly); add money as a line instrument of commensura- tion and relation; allow a relativist price to fluctuate in relation to need
