Proto-scientific speculation in the fourteenth century developed with- in the rigorous intellectual culture of the university, particularly at Paris  and Oxford. The abstraction, logical density, and technical complexity  characterizing this speculation engage and impress logicians and histor- ians of science to this day. Given the highly refined and formal intellec- tualism of scholastic natural philosophy, it is understandable that with few  exceptions historians of medieval science have hesitated to step outside the sphere of intellectual culture in their search for the factors influencing its development.

This book suggests a broader historical explanation for the new direc- tions taken in fourteenth-century natural philosophy than has so far been  offered. It argues that the transformation of the conceptual model of the  natural world, accomplished within the technical disciplines of the uni- versities of Oxford and Paris c. 1260–1380, was strongly influenced by the  rapid monetization of European society taking place over this same period, beyond the university and outside the culture of the book. It analyzes the impact of the monetized marketplace on the most striking  and characteristic concern of natural philosophy in this period: its preoc- cupation with measurement, gradation, and the quantification of quali- ties. It investigates the transference of insights from the philosophical  comprehension of the monetized marketplace to the philosophical com- prehension of nature. It traces how those perceptual shifts essential to the  emergence of modern science – the shift toward quantification, geomet- ric representation, multiplication, relativity, probability, mechanistic or- der, and dynamic equilibrium – were grounded in the experience and  comprehension of monetized society.

In the early years of the fourteenth century, English natural philos- ophers associated with Merton College, Oxford, initiated a vital new  approach to the study of motion and qualitative change.3 These scholars,  now known collectively as the ‘‘Merton School’’ or the ‘‘Oxford Calcu- lators,’’ constructed a highly technical logic and mathematics of measure- ment.4 They applied mathematical rules and quantitative schemata to a


