wide range of philosophical questions concerning qualities and motions, including the question of motion in space.5 In the process of refining their logico-mathematical analysis of qualitative change, the Calculators laid the foundations for a future mathematical physics.

By the second quarter of the fourteenth century, masters at the Uni- versity of Paris began to adopt the intellectual interests and methods of  the English Calculators. As they did so, the passion to measure and  quantify that characterized the proto-science of calculationes quickly in- vaded every realm of scholastic thought, including theology. Soon not  only entities that had never been measured before, but also those that have never been measured since, were subjected to a kind of quantitative  analysis. Theological questions concerning the most subjective and seem- ingly immeasurable qualities, such as the strength of Christian charity, or  the comparison of human love to Christ’s love, or the means by which the quality of grace increases in the soul, were routinely treated as problems of quantification, and subjected to analysis according to the latest developments in the logic and mathematics of measurement.6

Struck by the application of measuring schemata to the solution of philosophical and theological problems, John Murdoch asked: ‘‘How and why did the near frenzy to measure everything imaginable come about in the fourteenth century?’’7 Murdoch’s question, first posed more than two decades ago, is central to this present study. How are new conceptual possibilities created? Why are new intellectual problems and approaches suddenly brought to prominence? With characteristic forthrightness, Murdoch admitted that he could not answer with certainty how a measuring ‘‘mania’’ came to dominate speculation in this period, but he suggested a number of possibilities. His first suggestion pointed to a  creative dynamic produced solely from within the logic of the intellec- tual-philosophical debate.8 His second suggestion broadened the range of  influence to include the ‘‘catalyst’’ of theological concerns.9 Here he
