Without the vibrant intellectual culture of the medieval university in place – its disputational context, its characteristic attention to detail and logical rigor, its passion to synthesize – social experience and economic insights would never have been translated into new conceptual models, much less into mathematical and logical languages capable of expressing and refining these models. But at the same time, the rigid formality of  scholastic discourse, and the focus of fourteenth-century natural philos- ophy on the technical intricacies of mathematics and logic, has disguised  the rich layer of contact between philosophical speculation and social experience in this period. The biography of virtually every natural philosopher of note from the late thirteenth century reveals that the world of higher thought was not bounded by the walls of the university, whether actual or metaphorical. The new conceptual model of nature’s form and activity arose in the minds of men who were deeply involved in the life of their society and highly conscious of the transformative process of monetization taking place within it.

The students and masters at Oxford and Paris lived in urban settings  where the effects of monetization and commercialization were every- where to be seen and experienced.16 Were the student to venture into  High Street in Oxford, or to cross the Grand pont in Paris, he would likely be caught up in crowded markets as he measured the price of a coveted pen or book or tankard against the coins in his purse. If he were a foreigner to the city, as was most likely, he would be brought into frequent contact with moneychangers and the complex equations that converted his currency into locally accepted coin. He would be required  to calculate and husband his resources in a society that provided numer- ous opportunities for spending. It is hardly surprising that the earliest  surviving letters from university students witness their preoccupation with monetary shortages and record their pleas for financial aid.17

The involvement of the student in the world of the market was not limited to periodic encounters, nor did it end with his inception as master. If anything, it seems to have increased in the case of those scholars  most responsible for the new proto-scientific direction in natural philos- ophy. The one constant in the biographies of these scholars is that they  were repeatedly given responsibilities in practical affairs drawing on thinking far removed from their philosophical and theological training. Indeed, the most innovative and influential scholars of the century seem
