a concept central to the intellectual movement of calculationes and to proto-scientific thought in the fourteenth century.22

Despite ample evidence for the involvement of fourteenth-century natural philosophers in the economic life of their time, not one directly acknowledges the impact of social and economic experience on his  philosophical speculation. While in their economic writings they contin- ually state that ‘‘money measures all things’’ (inventum est nummisma ut sit  medium et mensura omnium commutabilium), and while they investigate in great depth how money performs its function of measuring, relating, and  equalizing, they never directly acknowledge its influence on their philo- sophical preoccupation with these same questions of measurement, rela- tion, and equalization. Although they often remark on money’s extra- ordinary success as an instrument of gradation and commensuration, they  never acknowledge it as a model for the conceptual instruments they themselves devised to perform similar functions within philosophical discourse. At a number of points in the following pages I discuss this lack of acknowledgment (or recognition) and what I believe are its probable causes, but some general observations can be made here.23

In contrast to modern scientific attitudes, scholastic thinkers expressed strong doubts that scientific truths could be based upon personal and particular experiences of an ever-changing object world. They believed that observations drawn from personal experience lacked the necessity,  universality, and truth-value required by science. There was, conse- quently, a concerted effort to cleanse philosophical discourse from the  taint of its contact with contingent experience. Insights drawn from the  experience of nature were quickly denatured – translated into proposi- tions and logical terms deemed to be the proper subjects of scholastic  debate. In a paradox that has often been remarked upon, many of the most important works in natural philosophy of this period contain not a single reference to personal observations of nature.

Experiences drawn from economic life carried with them a double weight of negative connotations since, even when scholastic thinkers  recognized the importance of economic activity, they remained suspi- cious of it. When the influential natural philosopher, Jean Buridan, writes  on economic questions, he shows conclusively that he understands the multi-faceted role of money as an instrument of measurement in ex-
