change – particularly money’s capacity to bring the most diverse goods into a common system of measurement and relation.24 Faced with a parallel question of measurement in his commentary on Aristotle’s Physics, Buridan asks whether money as a common measure of diverse goods can serve as a ‘‘proper’’ model for the philosophical measurement of diverse  species. Here, however, in the context of natural philosophy, he con- cludes that it cannot. Speaking within a tradition of medieval economic  commentary, he notes that money can measure only relative and ever- changing economic values, not the essential qualities and natures that are  of concern to philosophy. Even more damaging in his eyes was the association of monetary measurement with fraud. The economic value that money measures as selling price is, Buridan writes, often distorted through a bargaining process in which deception is intended by both buyer and seller. Thus, although Buridan is acutely aware of money’s function as the common measure of all goods in his society, he cannot accept its influence as a measure in philosophy.25 A similar disjunction is found in the work of every philosopher considered in this book. Given the strict requirements for truth, universality, and necessity in the highly formal discourse of scholastic natural philosophy, medieval thinkers never explicitly acknowledge the influence of any model drawn from the tainted sphere of the marketplace on their philosophical speculation.

In the absence of this conscious recognition (the ‘‘smoking gun,’’ so to  speak), I have relied throughout on the method of isolating and com- paring elements of the scholastic model of the monetized marketplace  (including the model of money as measure) with the defining elements of the proto-scientific model of nature that emerged in the fourteenth century. After isolating the elements that I believe define both intellectual spheres, I detail the verbal and formal similarities existing between them and the many levels of connection joining them. To make it easier for the reader to test the strength of these connections, I use the same category headings in my chapters on scientific thought as I do in my chapters on economic thought.

In order to explore the relationship between economic insights into the monetized marketplace and philosophical insights into the workings of nature, it is necessary to link areas of historical investigation rarely
