# Leibniz and The Kabbalah

## Allison P. Coudert

## Arizona State University

## IBSN: 978-90-481-4465-5

The general view of scholars is that the Kabbalah had no meaningful influence on Leibniz's thought.} But on the basis of new evidence I am convinced that the question must be reopened. The Kabbalah did influence Leibniz, and a recognition of this will lead to both a better understanding of the supposed "quirkiness,,2 of Leibniz's philosophy and an appreciation ofthe Kabbalah as an integral but hitherto ignored factor in the emergence of the modem secular and scientifically oriented world. During the past twenty years there has been increasing willingness to recognize the important ways in which mystical and occult thinking contributed to the development of science and the emergence of toleration. 3 However, the Kabbalah, particularly the Lurianic Kabbalah with its monistic vitalism and optimistic philosophy of perfectionism and universal salvation, has not yet been integrated into the new historiography, although it richly deserves to be.

On the basis of manuscripts in libraries at Hanover and Wolfenbiittel, it is clear that Leibniz's relationship with Francis Mercury van Helmont (1614- 1698) and Christian Knorr von Rosenroth (1636-1689), the two leading Christian Kabbalists of the period, was much closer than previously imagined and that his direct knowledge of their writings, especially the collection of kabbalistic texts they published in the Kabbala Denudata,4 was far more detailed than most scholars have realized. During 1688 Leibniz spent more than a month at Sulzbach with von Rosenroth. Foucher de Careil has pointed out how strange it was for Leibniz to stay in this one place for such a long time when he stayed hardly anywhere else for more than two nights.5 He suggests this must reflect a more than casual interest on Leibniz's part, although he rejects any kabbalistic influence on Leibniz's thought. As he says, "One senses that it [the Kabbalah] was only an object of curiosity for him, like many other imaginary curiosities of his time or of past centuries .... This energetic thinker [Leibniz] reduced all these doctrines to his own system. He only took what agreed with his own thought."6
Like so many commentators, Foucher de Careil is at pains to protect Leibniz's reputation as a rationalist wholly uncontaminated by the bizarre doctrines of the innumerable mystics, vitalists, and spiritualists populating the intellectual landscape of the early modem period. This view of Leibniz was, and in some quarters still is, prevalent. Many of the best known critics of Leibniz's thought have followed Bertrand Russell's lead and claim that "Leibniz's philosophy was almost entirely derived from his logic.,,7 In the words of Couturat, "Leibniz's metaphysics rests solely on the principles of his 10gic."S Leibniz is consequently the prime example of a rationalist philosopher: "Thus, the philosophy of Leibniz appears as the most complete and systematic expression possible of intellectual rationalism.,,9 But in recent years this view has been challenged. Leibniz, the rationalist philosopher, has ceded place to a far more complex and interesting individual, whose attempt to synthesize Renaissance vitalism and seventeenth-century atomism led him to an open-ended dialogue with both the living and the dead, a dialogue in which he constantly tested, refined, and modified his views. This is one reason why Leibniz's correspondence and unpublished manuscripts are so important as sources for reconstructing his thought. As Leibniz himself said, "Anyone who knows me only by my publications does not know me at all."l0 Like his monadology, Leibniz's philosophy was both dynamic and in many respects far too radical to be appreciated until the present century. 11

The assumption that one can usefully, or even accurately, distinguish  between empiricism and rationalism or between the so-called mechanical phi- losophy and occultism during the seventeenth century has become a subject  of considerable debate. Richard Popkin has been one of the most persuasive of those who argue that philosophy, science, and theology were inseparable in this period and that even the most apparently rational of seventeenth-century  intellectuals, such as Newton, Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, turned vari- ously to the Scriptures, prophecy, mystical or occult texts, and the inner light  in formulating and supporting their theories. 12 Meyer makes this point elo- quently and consistently in his careful documentation of the great diversity  of sources Leibniz drew upon in the formulation of his mature philosophy.13 Baruzi emphasizes the "irrational" elements in Leibniz's "rationalism" and suggests that the essence of Leibniz's theodicy lay in his mystical faith in a kind of religious determinism. 14 Mahnke describes Leibniz as "rationalizing mysticism." 15 Friedmann emphasizes the occult aspects of Leibniz's thought, regretting the fact that these sources have not been studied as closely as they deserve. 16 He goes as far as to describe Leibniz as a late seventeenth-century Paracelsus, who had the good fortune to profit from a century of modem science. 17 Knecht presents a detailed account of the diverse occult sources from which Leibniz drew his ideas. IS For scholars subscribing to the so-called
"external" view of science and philosophy, Leibniz's logic and metaphysics are indeed connected, but his metaphysics, which includes, or is included, in his theology, came first. Loemker came to this conclusion many years ago: " ... it is significant that not only Leibniz's metaphysics but his logic and physics were developed as a foundation for his theology." 19 On a number of occasions Leibniz revealed where his priorites lay. For example, he described himself in the eyes of an imaginary visitor as follows:

> I surprised him [Leibniz] one day, reading books about [religious] contro- versies. I showed my astonishment because I had been led to believe he  was a mathematician by profession, since he had done practically nothing else while in Paris. It was then that he told me that such an idea was very  mistaken, that he had many other interests, and that his principal medita- tions involved theology. He only applied himself to mathematics, as he did  to scholastic philosophy, to perfect his understanding and to learn the art of discovering and demonstrating [truth], which he believed to be so far apart at present as to be entirely different. 20

Loemker rejects Russell's view that there were two Leibnizes, a good logician and a bad, even dishonest, theologian. In his view, Leibniz's logic, like his science, was one aspect of his larger attempt to formulate a general  science, but his conviction that a general science was possible rested on meta- physical and theological assumptions derived from such thinkers as Raymond  Lull and the circle of encyclopedists at Herborn, hardly remembered for their rationalism.21 For Loemker, it is Leibniz's refusal to ignore the complexities and inconsistencies of real life for the sake of forging a fully rational system that makes him such an enduring and sympathetic philosopher:

> His age and his own genius confirmed the logician and mathematician in him, while his devotion to fact pushed him to acknowledge the unclear,  the indistinct, and the relative, to a point far beyond the superficial clari- ties and rationalizations of the age which followed him. One must choose  between the Leibniz who recognizes the symbolic and analogical nature of human thought but seeks the universal logical and moral norms which make it possible and the Leibniz who would analyze possibility and find existence hidden within it. The choice is between his two great analogies -  mathematical relationships or psychological continuity within a phenom- enally presented environment. It is the choice of beginning either from  the pure logic of anll;lysis and failing to build a metaphysics or from the awareness of the human situation but with a willingness to proceed beyond phenomena to the principles on which they may be "well founded." To one student at least, it is the latter Leibniz, who begins with human problems and human symbols but retains the powerful tools of reason not only in mathematics and logic but in life, without sacrificing the adventure of human creativeness, who seems to offer the more fruitful philosophical answers.22
Taking Loemker's lead, one must conclude that it is impossible to under- stand those "quirkier" aspects of Leibniz's thought without admitting that  metaphysics and theology played a major part in his thinking and acknowl- edging that in his effort to comprehend the meaning and purpose of life he  drew on a variety of sources from all parts of the philosophical spectrum. For example, Margaret Wilson has demonstrated that the so-called vis viva controversy is not fully comprehensible unless one realizes that Leibniz's objection to the Cartesian axiom of the conservation of motion (and not force as Leibniz argued) was motivated by Leibniz's theological and metaphysical commitment to contingency and teleology in nature.23 David Papineau makes much the same point when he points out how mistaken scholars have been who dismiss the controversy as an empty dispute over terminology.24 Leibniz himself tells us as much, making it crystal clear that metaphysics determined his science, not science his metaphysics:

> Although I am one of those who have done much work in mathematics, I have constantly meditated on philosophy from my youth up, for it has always seemed to me that here, too, there is a way to establish something sound through clear demonstrations. I had penetrated deeply into the land of the Scholastics, when mathematics and modem authors made me withdraw from it while I was still young. Their beautiful ways of explaining nature mechanically charmed me, and with good reason I despised the method of those who use only forms or faculties of which nothing is understood. But later, after trying to explore the principles of mechanics itself in order to account for the laws of nature which we learn from experience, I perceived that the sole consideration of extended mass was not enough but that it was necessary, in addition, to use the concept of jorce, which is fully intelligible, although it falls within the sphere of metaphysics.25

In a similar way, the debate about exactly what Leibniz envisaged by monads has led at least one scholar to throw up her hands and conclude the problem insoluble from a strictly rational perspective, since a monad "is a mystical concept, not only a construct of reason."26

R. E. Butts has further weakened the case for the rationalist Leibniz, whose admittedly bizarre metaphysics stemmed from his science, by perceptively pointing out that if Leibniz's mathematical and logical discoveries provided the basis for his metaphysics, how can one account for the very different conclusions other scientists derived from the same mathematical and logical theories? Referring specifically to Leibniz's discovery of infinitesimal calcu-
Ius, which has often been seen as the foundation for his monadology, Butts remarks, "If the calculus were liable to metaphysical interpretation only in terms of Leibnizian continuity, what fools Newton and Berkeley must have been!,,27 Butts completely rejects the view of Leibniz as a rationalist and  argues instead that his philosophy is essentially a reformation of Gnosti- cism: " ... the entire intellectual career of Leibniz was an attempt to convert  what he took to be the insights and consequences of an essentially gnostic weltanschauung into publicly available scientific knowledge.,,28 Butts argues that Leibniz's idea of continuity, his idea that monads emanate from God in the form of light, and his notion that evil represents limit and privation all originate in Gnosticism:

> If I am right that the physics of forces was suggested by the organicism of Leibniz's publicly proclaimed systematic Gnosticism; if I am right that the infinitesimals are a mathematicized expression of the principle of continuity coupled with the basic idea of the monad, then I think I may also be right in suggesting that the fundamental Leibnizian notion that in all true propositions the predicate is fully contained in, or is identical with,  the subject is again the statement of a result of having accepted the God- monad-emanation-continuity metaphysics that I have sketched above. Like  Plato, Leibniz was not a "systematic" philosopher .... I do think it correct to hold, however, that Leibniz had a system, and that system was a coherent form of Renaissance Gnosticism. To want to make the ancient wisdom public, to want to have it motivate empirical inquiries - even to produce palpable practical results - was a high ambition.29

Butts is entirely right in pointing out the gnostic roots of Leibniz's phi- losophy. But instead of the somewhat vague, generic sources he cites, the  primary gnostic source for many of Leibniz's most important ideas was the Lurianic Kabbalah, which Leibniz came to know though his friendship and collaboration with Francis Mercury van Helmont.

My contention that Leibniz was influenced by the kabbalistic philosophy of Francis Mercury van Helmont rests on the fact that Leibniz's relationship with van Helmont extended over a much longer period, from 1671 to van Helmont's death in 1698, and was far closer than has previously been known. While it is true that Leibniz had a lively curiosity and a courtier's courtesy, these alone cannot explain his unusual interest in van Helmont's views. The  manuscripts in the "Helmont" collection in the Nierdersachsische Landesbib- liothek in Hanover, together with manuscripts from other collections, show  how conversant Leibniz was with van Helmont's thought. Even before they met in 1671, Leibniz knew van Helmont by reputation - he was, after all, the son of Jan Baptista van Helmont, whose work Leibniz knew well. In 1667 Leibniz mentions reading the younger van Helmont's first two books,
his translation of Octavius Pisani's Lycurgus Italicus, a book advocating a  reform of the penal system, and his Alphabeti vere naturalis Hebraici bre- vissima Delineatio, in which he argued that Hebrew was both a divine and  "natural" language. 3D Leibniz described their first meeting in Mainz in 1671 and suggests it was far from perfunctory in as much as they talked freely  about a touchy subject, alchemy, which greatly interested them both.31 Leib- niz was also in Sulzbach in 1671, where, through the offices of van Helmont,  he was introduced to Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. With van Helmont's  help, von Rosenroth was in the process of editing and translating the kabbal- istic texts that would later be published in the Kabbala Denudata. 32 Further  references to van Helmont and von Rosenroth occur in 1672 when Leibniz writes to Johann Friedrich Schlitz in the hopes of discovering van Helmont's whereabouts,33 in 1676 when Leibniz mentions that von Rosenroth has sent him a copy of Boyle's "Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God" and "The Possibility ofthe Resurrection, .. 34 and in 1679 when Leibniz again met van Helmont at the sick bed of the Palatine Princess Elizabeth, who was an old friend of van Helmont's and the sister of Leibniz's future patron, Sophie Duchess of Hanover.35 In 1681 Leibniz mentions van Helmont in several letters. Six years after that came Leibniz's long stay in Sulzbach. In 1694 Leibniz again met van Helmont for extensive periods in March and April,  this time at Hanover. From this year until van Helmont's death in 1698, Leib- niz and van Helmont were in constant contact, either personally or by letter.  It is my belief that the initial contacts between van Helmont, von Rosenroth, and Leibniz between 1671 and 1688 laid the foundation for the more intense friendship and collaboration that began in 1694 and played a catalytic role in the formulation of Leibniz's fully developed monadology.

There are many reasons why Leibniz should have been drawn to van Helmont. The description of Leibniz as a super rationalist overlooks the fact that like van Helmont he was enthralled by every aspect of the material world, not in an abstract intellectual sense but as a thorough-going empiricist: " ... nothing allows us to indicate the divine perfections better than the admirable beauties that are found in its works." His receptivity to the wonders of nature made him critical of spiritualists and quietists who rejected the study of this world as worthless and even corrupting:

> I see that the majority of those who pretend to a greater spirituality, especially the Quakers, try to create a distaste for the contemplation of natural truths. But in my opinion, they ought to do exactly the opposite if they do not wish to maintain our natural laziness and ignorance. < In this I find Messieurs Helmont, Knorr, More and Poiret more reasonable than the majority of the others, although I do not wish to sanction many oftheir sentiments where they stray from the Church.> True love is based on knowledge of the beauty of the object one loves. But the beauty of God appears in the marvelous effects of his sovereign cause. Thus, the more one und~rstands nature and the solid truth of real sciences, which are so many rays of divine perfection, the more one is able to truly love God.36
Leibniz's exclusion of Van Helmont (along with von Rosenroth, More, and Poiret) from such world-denying spiritualists was certainly accurate in van  Helmont's case, for as van Helmont once wrote, "the beauty of this Liv- ing Earth when seen with a microscope will make a man in Love with  it. ,,37 Both Leibniz and van Helmont were practicing alchemists who avidly studied minerals, metals, and a variety of different substances and chemical processes.38 Leibniz's interest in alchemy revealed itself early in his career when he became the secretary of a society in Niirnberg whose members were interested in transmutation.39 Although van Helmont's fame as an alchemist  was greater, Leibniz also had the reputation of an adept with deep theoreti- cal knowledge. Like his English contemporaries, Boyle, Locke, and Newton,  Leibniz hoped to make a fortune from the art. With this aim in mind, he entered into a profit-sharing agreement in 1676 with two alchemists, G. H. Schuller and J. D. Crafft, in which he provided the capital and the advice. As Ross has remarked, Leibniz was apparently always an easy touch for alchemists.4o  Undoubtedly it was because of his own interest that Leibniz carefully fol- lowed van Helmont's alchemical career. In 1680 he told a correspondent that  he did not believe van Helmont knew the secret of transmutation, precisely because of the long talks they had some eight years earlier.41 In 1681 he informed Landgraf Ernst von Hessen-Rheinfels that van Helmont was in the company of a M. Kohlhas, who passed himself off as an adept. 42 In the letters they wrote and discussions they had between 1694 and 1698 Leibniz and van Helmont often brought up various alchemical subjects concerning the making of medicines and the process of distillation. Leibniz even discussed alchemy on his death bed. Much to the disgust of a Catholic critic, who believed it would have been more profitable for Leibniz to have spent his last moments  worrying about the unfortunate state of his soul, Leibniz's final words con- cerned a report that iron nails had been transmuted into gold through the  action of a certain spring.43

The fact that van Helmont and Leibniz were both practising alchemists reveals their common grounding in what has been labelled "Renaissance occultism," a subject of enormous importance in the history of science, as Paolo Rossi, Francis Yates, D. P. Walker, and Charles Webster, among others, have shown. From Nicolas of Cusa to Giordano Bruno, major Renaissance philosophers shared an animistic view of the world as one harmonious whole, filled with innumerable immaterial, vital souls created by God through a series of emanations. Brian Vickers has made the cogent observation that the whole
tenor of Renaissance Neoplatonism and occultism in general is "a progressive reification of the immaterial. .. 44 The elaborate series of emanations described in the various neoplatonic, hermetic, and kabbalistic creation myths woven together in the rich fabric of Renaissance occultism served to explain how the one became the many or how spirit was gradually transformed into matter. Leibniz and van Helmont rejected Cartesian dualism precisely because of their allegiance to Renaissance occultism. Their friendship and collaboration was based to a large extent on their mutual indebtedness to a vitalistic world view that originated in an earlier age and came increasingly under attack with the emergence of the so-called mechanical philosophy.

Renaissance occultists, and those who followed in their footsteps like van Helmont and Leibniz, were also committed to the idea that a certain prisca theologia, or primeval philosophy, existed which God had imparted to Moses on Mt. Sinai and which had culminated in Christianity. Elements of this ancient wisdom were thought to be contained in the philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato, the Hermetica, the Sibylline Prophecies, the Ophica, and, of course, the Kabbalah.45 It was believed that if this prisca theologia could be rediscovered in its authentic, uncorrupted form, it would provide the basis for a truly ecumenical religion and bring an end, once and for all, to the terrible wars caused by religious conflicts. While nominally Christian, the various versions of this supposedly rediscovered prisca theologia offered by Pico della Mirandola, Guillaume Postel, Giordano Bruno, and Tommaso Campanella, for example, were heretical in many respects.46 As I will argue, the version van Helmont thought he had rediscovered in the Lurianic Kabbalah and which influenced Leibniz's Monadology (Leibniz's own version of the prisca theologia47) was equally heretical because it reasserted the Pelagian belief in universal salvation condemned by the Roman Catholic Church in 416 C. E. The subject of both Renaissance occultism and the search for the prisca theologia will come up repeatedly in this monograph (for example, when discussing the sources of Leibniz's Monadology in chapter four, his theodicy in chapter six, and his theories of causation in chapter seven), for it is my contention that Renaissance occultism - in all its various forms - and the search for the prisca theologia provided the basis for Leibniz's mature monadology and the rationale for his optimism. Thus, while the whole point of this monograph is to show that van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy had a decisive influence in shaping Leibniz's Monadology, it is important to recognize the common heritage of ideas which influenced the thought of both men. Leibniz was not introduced to the Kabbalah by van Helmont; kabbalistic ideas were a part of Leibniz's intellectual heritage, and he referred to the Kabbalah, both positively and negatively, before the period of his close friendship and collaboration with van Helmont. 48 Van Helmont did, however,
introduce Leibniz to the Lurianic Kabbalah, and it is the purpose of this monograph to explore the ways in which this particular form of the Kabbalah influenced Leibniz's philosophy.

Although Leibniz and van Helmont were both practicing alchemists and clearly interested in the lucrative aspects of the art, they were more than "projectors" in the alchemical sense. Private gain did not interest them nearly as much as the public good. As Leibniz wrote in a letter to Thomas Burnett: "You know my principles, Sir, which are to prefer the public good to all other considerations, even to glory and gold.,,49 This is perhaps what drew them most together. They were both committed to doing everything possible to improve the human condition, first and foremost by restoring religious unity and, secondly, by devising innumerable projects for all kinds of socially useful inventions. Leibniz's calculator is perhaps the best known, but he also proposed plans for such things as a high speed coach, which would run along rutted tracks on something like ball bearings, a scheme for draining water from the Hartz mines, an inland navigation system, the manufacture of porcelain, the exploitation of waste heat in furnaces, tax reform, a public health and fire service, steam-powered fountains, street lighting, a state bank, and isolation wards for plague victims. so While not quite so ingenious, van Helmont devised plans for a two-handed spinning wheel and weaving projects to employ the poor, a chair to straighten crooked backs, and new methods to teach the deaf and dumb to speak and children to write. Leibniz's similar concern with education appeared early in his career with A New Method for Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence (1667). Van Helmont also described a scheme for setting up pawn shops to help the poor, which he presented to the Royal Society,S1 and he offered proposals for reforming both the medical and the legal professions. Leibniz constantly refers to this altruistic aspect of van Helmont's character. In a letter to Thomas Burnett he emphasizes the fact that van Helmont was one of the few people he knew who practiced virtue instead of just talking about it. He admits that van Helmont may well have extraordinary opinions, but he adds, "for all that I find that he has excellent ideas about practical matters and that he would be overjoyed to contribute to the general good, in which I entirely agree ... "S2 Leibniz repeated much the same thing in a letter to Andre Morell, the numismatist and zealous disciple of Boehme and Poiret:

> In my opinion the touchstone of true illumination is a great eagerness for contributing to the general good. I find so few people who take this to heart that I am astonished. I have suggested this thousands oftimes. But I usually find that those people who wish to appear the most pious are paralyzed when it really comes to doing something good. They are content to vent themselves with fine words as if God can be earned with ceremonies. I find also that few men have a true idea of good. I only deign to give this name to someone who really tries to make men more perfect and the grandeur of God better known. I also find that those who are of a sectarian or schismatic humor, that is to say those who have separated themselves as men filled with good intentions, but who do not act reasonably in their opinions, do not know how to have charity nor illumination in its true purity. It seems to me that the late M. Labadie, the late Mlle. de Bourignon, and William Penn, with his co-religionists, had that fault of being sectarian and condemning. Among those who had extraordinary ideas, I have hardly found anyone beside M. van Helmont who shared this great principle of charity with me and who had a true eagerness for the general good, although in other respects we often had very different opinions about different matters.53
For Leibniz true piety consisted in charity towards one's fellow men - not separation from them - whatever their station in life, country of birth, or particular religion: " ... to contribute to the public good and to the glory of God is the same thing. ,,54 Their humanitarian outlook and mutual concern for justice predisposed both men to take a tolerant view whenever possible of the opinions and actions of others. This outlook led van Helmont to the unusual conviction that a just God could not damn men eternally, whatever their beliefs or sins. He consequently rejected the orthodox conception of hell in favor of universal salvation. While Leibniz did not go as far, at least publicly, he was influenced by van Helmont's arguments, as I will argue in a later portion of this monograph.

The major impetus behind the activities of both men was their untiring effort to restore religious unity in an age of deadly and vituperative sectarian conflict. Baruzi, who has studied Leibniz's theological writings, concluded that had Leibniz dated to write out a full exposition of his views, it would  probably have centered on three elements: the love of God as a sufficient con- dition for salvation; charity towards one's fellow man as the most important  religious duty, and the cultivation of philosophy and science as a way to gain knowledge of God.55 While in Paris Leibniz formulated a prayer which he thought the basis for a truly ecumenical religion, only to receive a shocked response from Arnauld, who rejected it outright because it said nothing about Christ.56 Van Helmont's ecumenism went even farther than Leibniz's, to the point that he was pursued and imprisoned as a heretic. He believed that all men could be saved, whatever their religion, a sentiment that clearly undercut the unique role of Christ in salvation and embraced the Pelagian idea that an individual could be saved by his own efforts.57 As I will show, the same Pelagian implications appear in Leibniz's mature monadology and came from van Helmont and the Lurianic Kabbalah.
Leibniz loathed the dogmatic approach and intemperate language charac- teristic of the philosophical and scientific debates of the time. He consistently  tried to put a good spin on the opinions of others, including van Helmont's, as we shall see. In his own writings he found it impossible to be dogmatic or even systematic. As Ross has pointed out, the dialogue form seems to have suited him best.58 This may account for the fact that his correspondence is so much richer a source for his philosophy than the relatively few works he managed to publish, for it is a continual dialogue in which he never ceases to probe and question. Given his basic quest for consensus, the tentative nature of his system is understandable and even laudable:

> My system ... is not a complete body of philosophy, and I do not claim to have a reason for everything that other people have thought they can explain. Progress must be gradual to be assured.59

Van Helmont also preferred the dialogue form. Most of his books are written as questions and answers, even the one Leibniz ghosted for him, but this is to look ahead. Both Leibniz and van Helmont were able to keep up amicable relations with people of widely differing opinions and views.6o This ability provided the basis for Russell's unfortunate charge that Leibniz was insincere and  duplicitous, when it could be argued instead that he was intellectually broad- minded as well as civil. In van Helmont's case, his ability to inspire friendships  among a widely divergent group of scientists, philosophers, statesmen, and theologians (which, in addition to Leibniz, included Locke, More, Boyle, all the members of the Palatine family, Lord and Lady Conway, and Prince Christian August of Sulzbach, to name but a few) has been overlooked in the general rush to dismiss him as an enthusiast and intellectual light-weight. (Hopefully, this investigation will slow down the rush, if not stop it all together).

There is one last reason that helps to explain the friendship of these two men. Both were outsiders in the sense that the universality of their vision transcended the narrow sectarian and national boundaries so fiercely defended at the time. In a century of increasing nationalism and patriotism, Leibniz clung to the universalistic ideal of the Republic of Letters. Writing to Des Billettes, a pensioner of the Academy of Sciences in Paris and an expert on arts and crafts, he emphasizes his concern for the betterment of all men:

> Provided that something of importance is achieved, I am indifferent whether it is done in Germany or in France, for I seek the good of mankind. I am neither a phil-Hellene nor a philo-Roman but a phil-anthropos.61

In another letter written at the end of his life, he expressed much the same idea:
> ... I make no distinction of nation or party, and I should prefer to see the sciences made flourishing in Russia rather than given only mediocre cultivation in Germany. The country which does this best will be the country dearest to me, since the whole human race will always profit from it. 62

There were, however, those who considered his international and ecumenical efforts treachery, and by these he was given the nickname "Love - nix," believer in nothing.63 (Leibniz took the Socratic high road in his response. Yes, he agreed he was a believer in nothing since he believed only what he  knew.64) Van Helmont also aroused the suspicion of those who saw some- thing sinister and subversive behind his genial and generous nature. He was,  for example, labeled and even imprisoned by the Inquisition as a "judaizer,"  meaning that he not only failed to hate the Jews the way a normal Chris- tian should, but that he went out of his way to defend and support Jews,  even befriending the unfortunate Johann Peter Speath after his conversion to Judaism, an all but unheard of act for Christians, who looked upon conversion to Judaism with horror.65 Leibniz and van Helmont were also both outsiders in that they ignored conventions, be it of dress or manners. Leibniz's German contemporaries scoffed at him for being "Frenchified." Late in life he became an object of ridicule for his old-fashioned, overly ornate clothes and huge black wig. The Electress Sophie's youngest son, Prince Ernst August, once described Leibniz as an "archaeological find" and joked that Peter the Great must have taken him for the Duke of Wolfenbiittel's clown.66 Van Helmont cut an equally strange figure. He adopted the Quaker practice of refusing to remove one's hat and bow to superiors, scandalous behavior in an intensely hierarchical age, but an indication of van Helmont's deep commitment to the democratic principle of universal brotherhood. He too refused to bend to fashion and wore simple clothes from material spun, woven, and tailored with his own hands. Shortly after van Helmont's death, Leibniz wrote his epitaph. It reveals the extent of his admiration for this friend who was his double in so many respects:

> Here lies the other Helmont, in no way inferior to his father, 

> who joined together the wealth of various arts and sciences. 

> Through him Pythagoras and the sacred Cabala were reborn. 

> And like Elaus, he was able to make everything for himself. 

> If he had lived among the Greeks, 

> he would now be numbered among the stars. 67

With this introduction one may be in a better position to understand why  Leibniz should actually have ghosted van Helmont's last book. As Anne Bec- co has shown from her examination of Leibniz's manuscripts, Leibniz actu-
ally wrote the last work published in van Helmont's name, Some Premeditate and Considerate Thoughts upon the Four First Chapters of the First Book of Mosis called Genesis (hereafter abbreviated as Thoughts on Genesis).68 Ghost-writing a book for a self-proclaimed Kabbalist is an extraordinary act for someone supposedly repelled by fanciful kabbalistic theories69 and one  that cries out for explanation. The explanation lies in those aspects of kab- balistic thought which Leibniz adapted to his own purposes. In what follows  I suggest the key issues in Leibniz's philosophy that must be analyzed from a kabbalistic perspective, for example, his concept of monads, his attempt to defend free will, and his theories of language and causation, and I document  the ways in which van Helmont's thought acted as a catalyst in the develop- ment of Leibniz's. In taking this position I am following in the footsteps of  Anne Becco and Bernardino Qrio de Miguel, who have both argued that van Helmont's kabbalistic philosophy influenced Leibniz, although my evidence is different and, I hope, more persuasive.7o But before considering those who entertain the idea of van Helmont's possible influence on Leibniz, it is first necessary to discuss the work of those who reject such an influence. Since the literature on Leibniz is enormous, I mention only some of the best known and most often cited works dealing with the sources of Leibniz's thought, hoping to give the reader an accurate overall impression of the present state of Leibniz scholarship on these issues.

To establish van Helmont's influence on Leibniz, it is imperative to estab- lish two points: first, that Leibniz's mature philosophy was not in place by  the time he wrote the Discourse on Metaphysics in 1686 but continued to evolve between 1694 and 1698 when his contact with van Helmont was most intense; and second, that if Leibniz's philosophy did indeed evolve after 1694, enough persuasive evidence exists to show that it evolved in ways that can be attributed to van Helmont's influence. It is not always possible to keep these questions separate, but in order to bring as much clarity as possible to my argument, I have divided the remainder of this study into seven chapters and a conclusion. The first chapter reviews the arguments for and against the  thesis that the Discourse represents the emergence of Leibniz's mature phi- losophy. Among those who have argued that Leibniz's philosophy evolved, I  have only included in this section those authors who attribute this evolution to factors other than van Helmont or who leave the question of influence unanswered. In the second chapter, I discuss the work of those authors who have either suggested van Helmont's possible influence on Leibniz or who recognize that their thought "converged" in important respects. I then turn to Anne Becco's important discovery that Leibniz actually wrote van Helmont's last published work and to the thesis supported by her and Qrio de Miguel that van Helmont did influence Leibniz in decisive ways. In the third chapter,
I offer new evidence to show the closeness of Leibniz and van Helmont's friendship and the reasons for their collaboration. In the next three chapters I take up three key issues in Leibniz's philosophy, his concept of monads, his attempt to establish a basis for individual freedom, and his theodicy, and I offer evidence to show how the Kabbalah contributed to the development of Leibniz's mature philosophy in each of these areas. In the final chapter I discuss the ways in which Leibniz's theories of causation and language were influenced by the Kabbalah.
