For Leibniz true piety consisted in charity towards one's fellow men - not separation from them - whatever their station in life, country of birth, or particular religion: " ... to contribute to the public good and to the glory of God is the same thing. ,,54 Their humanitarian outlook and mutual concern for justice predisposed both men to take a tolerant view whenever possible of the opinions and actions of others. This outlook led van Helmont to the unusual conviction that a just God could not damn men eternally, whatever their beliefs or sins. He consequently rejected the orthodox conception of hell in favor of universal salvation. While Leibniz did not go as far, at least publicly, he was influenced by van Helmont's arguments, as I will argue in a later portion of this monograph.

The major impetus behind the activities of both men was their untiring effort to restore religious unity in an age of deadly and vituperative sectarian conflict. Baruzi, who has studied Leibniz's theological writings, concluded that had Leibniz dated to write out a full exposition of his views, it would  probably have centered on three elements: the love of God as a sufficient con- dition for salvation; charity towards one's fellow man as the most important  religious duty, and the cultivation of philosophy and science as a way to gain knowledge of God.55 While in Paris Leibniz formulated a prayer which he thought the basis for a truly ecumenical religion, only to receive a shocked response from Arnauld, who rejected it outright because it said nothing about Christ.56 Van Helmont's ecumenism went even farther than Leibniz's, to the point that he was pursued and imprisoned as a heretic. He believed that all men could be saved, whatever their religion, a sentiment that clearly undercut the unique role of Christ in salvation and embraced the Pelagian idea that an individual could be saved by his own efforts.57 As I will show, the same Pelagian implications appear in Leibniz's mature monadology and came from van Helmont and the Lurianic Kabbalah.
