Leibniz loathed the dogmatic approach and intemperate language charac- teristic of the philosophical and scientific debates of the time. He consistently  tried to put a good spin on the opinions of others, including van Helmont's, as we shall see. In his own writings he found it impossible to be dogmatic or even systematic. As Ross has pointed out, the dialogue form seems to have suited him best.58 This may account for the fact that his correspondence is so much richer a source for his philosophy than the relatively few works he managed to publish, for it is a continual dialogue in which he never ceases to probe and question. Given his basic quest for consensus, the tentative nature of his system is understandable and even laudable:

> My system ... is not a complete body of philosophy, and I do not claim to have a reason for everything that other people have thought they can explain. Progress must be gradual to be assured.59

Van Helmont also preferred the dialogue form. Most of his books are written as questions and answers, even the one Leibniz ghosted for him, but this is to look ahead. Both Leibniz and van Helmont were able to keep up amicable relations with people of widely differing opinions and views.6o This ability provided the basis for Russell's unfortunate charge that Leibniz was insincere and  duplicitous, when it could be argued instead that he was intellectually broad- minded as well as civil. In van Helmont's case, his ability to inspire friendships  among a widely divergent group of scientists, philosophers, statesmen, and theologians (which, in addition to Leibniz, included Locke, More, Boyle, all the members of the Palatine family, Lord and Lady Conway, and Prince Christian August of Sulzbach, to name but a few) has been overlooked in the general rush to dismiss him as an enthusiast and intellectual light-weight. (Hopefully, this investigation will slow down the rush, if not stop it all together).

There is one last reason that helps to explain the friendship of these two men. Both were outsiders in the sense that the universality of their vision transcended the narrow sectarian and national boundaries so fiercely defended at the time. In a century of increasing nationalism and patriotism, Leibniz clung to the universalistic ideal of the Republic of Letters. Writing to Des Billettes, a pensioner of the Academy of Sciences in Paris and an expert on arts and crafts, he emphasizes his concern for the betterment of all men:

> Provided that something of importance is achieved, I am indifferent whether it is done in Germany or in France, for I seek the good of mankind. I am neither a phil-Hellene nor a philo-Roman but a phil-anthropos.61

In another letter written at the end of his life, he expressed much the same idea:
