> ... I make no distinction of nation or party, and I should prefer to see the sciences made flourishing in Russia rather than given only mediocre cultivation in Germany. The country which does this best will be the country dearest to me, since the whole human race will always profit from it. 62

There were, however, those who considered his international and ecumenical efforts treachery, and by these he was given the nickname "Love - nix," believer in nothing.63 (Leibniz took the Socratic high road in his response. Yes, he agreed he was a believer in nothing since he believed only what he  knew.64) Van Helmont also aroused the suspicion of those who saw some- thing sinister and subversive behind his genial and generous nature. He was,  for example, labeled and even imprisoned by the Inquisition as a "judaizer,"  meaning that he not only failed to hate the Jews the way a normal Chris- tian should, but that he went out of his way to defend and support Jews,  even befriending the unfortunate Johann Peter Speath after his conversion to Judaism, an all but unheard of act for Christians, who looked upon conversion to Judaism with horror.65 Leibniz and van Helmont were also both outsiders in that they ignored conventions, be it of dress or manners. Leibniz's German contemporaries scoffed at him for being "Frenchified." Late in life he became an object of ridicule for his old-fashioned, overly ornate clothes and huge black wig. The Electress Sophie's youngest son, Prince Ernst August, once described Leibniz as an "archaeological find" and joked that Peter the Great must have taken him for the Duke of Wolfenbiittel's clown.66 Van Helmont cut an equally strange figure. He adopted the Quaker practice of refusing to remove one's hat and bow to superiors, scandalous behavior in an intensely hierarchical age, but an indication of van Helmont's deep commitment to the democratic principle of universal brotherhood. He too refused to bend to fashion and wore simple clothes from material spun, woven, and tailored with his own hands. Shortly after van Helmont's death, Leibniz wrote his epitaph. It reveals the extent of his admiration for this friend who was his double in so many respects:

> Here lies the other Helmont, in no way inferior to his father, 

> who joined together the wealth of various arts and sciences. 

> Through him Pythagoras and the sacred Cabala were reborn. 

> And like Elaus, he was able to make everything for himself. 

> If he had lived among the Greeks, 

> he would now be numbered among the stars. 67

With this introduction one may be in a better position to understand why  Leibniz should actually have ghosted van Helmont's last book. As Anne Bec- co has shown from her examination of Leibniz's manuscripts, Leibniz actu-
