Like so many commentators, Foucher de Careil is at pains to protect Leibniz's reputation as a rationalist wholly uncontaminated by the bizarre doctrines of the innumerable mystics, vitalists, and spiritualists populating the intellectual landscape of the early modem period. This view of Leibniz was, and in some quarters still is, prevalent. Many of the best known critics of Leibniz's thought have followed Bertrand Russell's lead and claim that "Leibniz's philosophy was almost entirely derived from his logic.,,7 In the words of Couturat, "Leibniz's metaphysics rests solely on the principles of his 10gic."S Leibniz is consequently the prime example of a rationalist philosopher: "Thus, the philosophy of Leibniz appears as the most complete and systematic expression possible of intellectual rationalism.,,9 But in recent years this view has been challenged. Leibniz, the rationalist philosopher, has ceded place to a far more complex and interesting individual, whose attempt to synthesize Renaissance vitalism and seventeenth-century atomism led him to an open-ended dialogue with both the living and the dead, a dialogue in which he constantly tested, refined, and modified his views. This is one reason why Leibniz's correspondence and unpublished manuscripts are so important as sources for reconstructing his thought. As Leibniz himself said, "Anyone who knows me only by my publications does not know me at all."l0 Like his monadology, Leibniz's philosophy was both dynamic and in many respects far too radical to be appreciated until the present century. 11

The assumption that one can usefully, or even accurately, distinguish  between empiricism and rationalism or between the so-called mechanical phi- losophy and occultism during the seventeenth century has become a subject  of considerable debate. Richard Popkin has been one of the most persuasive of those who argue that philosophy, science, and theology were inseparable in this period and that even the most apparently rational of seventeenth-century  intellectuals, such as Newton, Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz, turned vari- ously to the Scriptures, prophecy, mystical or occult texts, and the inner light  in formulating and supporting their theories. 12 Meyer makes this point elo- quently and consistently in his careful documentation of the great diversity  of sources Leibniz drew upon in the formulation of his mature philosophy.13 Baruzi emphasizes the "irrational" elements in Leibniz's "rationalism" and suggests that the essence of Leibniz's theodicy lay in his mystical faith in a kind of religious determinism. 14 Mahnke describes Leibniz as "rationalizing mysticism." 15 Friedmann emphasizes the occult aspects of Leibniz's thought, regretting the fact that these sources have not been studied as closely as they deserve. 16 He goes as far as to describe Leibniz as a late seventeenth-century Paracelsus, who had the good fortune to profit from a century of modem science. 17 Knecht presents a detailed account of the diverse occult sources from which Leibniz drew his ideas. IS For scholars subscribing to the so-called
