his translation of Octavius Pisani's Lycurgus Italicus, a book advocating a  reform of the penal system, and his Alphabeti vere naturalis Hebraici bre- vissima Delineatio, in which he argued that Hebrew was both a divine and  "natural" language. 3D Leibniz described their first meeting in Mainz in 1671 and suggests it was far from perfunctory in as much as they talked freely  about a touchy subject, alchemy, which greatly interested them both.31 Leib- niz was also in Sulzbach in 1671, where, through the offices of van Helmont,  he was introduced to Christian Knorr von Rosenroth. With van Helmont's  help, von Rosenroth was in the process of editing and translating the kabbal- istic texts that would later be published in the Kabbala Denudata. 32 Further  references to van Helmont and von Rosenroth occur in 1672 when Leibniz writes to Johann Friedrich Schlitz in the hopes of discovering van Helmont's whereabouts,33 in 1676 when Leibniz mentions that von Rosenroth has sent him a copy of Boyle's "Some Motives and Incentives to the Love of God" and "The Possibility ofthe Resurrection, .. 34 and in 1679 when Leibniz again met van Helmont at the sick bed of the Palatine Princess Elizabeth, who was an old friend of van Helmont's and the sister of Leibniz's future patron, Sophie Duchess of Hanover.35 In 1681 Leibniz mentions van Helmont in several letters. Six years after that came Leibniz's long stay in Sulzbach. In 1694 Leibniz again met van Helmont for extensive periods in March and April,  this time at Hanover. From this year until van Helmont's death in 1698, Leib- niz and van Helmont were in constant contact, either personally or by letter.  It is my belief that the initial contacts between van Helmont, von Rosenroth, and Leibniz between 1671 and 1688 laid the foundation for the more intense friendship and collaboration that began in 1694 and played a catalytic role in the formulation of Leibniz's fully developed monadology.

There are many reasons why Leibniz should have been drawn to van Helmont. The description of Leibniz as a super rationalist overlooks the fact that like van Helmont he was enthralled by every aspect of the material world, not in an abstract intellectual sense but as a thorough-going empiricist: " ... nothing allows us to indicate the divine perfections better than the admirable beauties that are found in its works." His receptivity to the wonders of nature made him critical of spiritualists and quietists who rejected the study of this world as worthless and even corrupting:

> I see that the majority of those who pretend to a greater spirituality, especially the Quakers, try to create a distaste for the contemplation of natural truths. But in my opinion, they ought to do exactly the opposite if they do not wish to maintain our natural laziness and ignorance. < In this I find Messieurs Helmont, Knorr, More and Poiret more reasonable than the majority of the others, although I do not wish to sanction many oftheir sentiments where they stray from the Church.> True love is based on knowledge of the beauty of the object one loves. But the beauty of God appears in the marvelous effects of his sovereign cause. Thus, the more one und~rstands nature and the solid truth of real sciences, which are so many rays of divine perfection, the more one is able to truly love God.36
