introduce Leibniz to the Lurianic Kabbalah, and it is the purpose of this monograph to explore the ways in which this particular form of the Kabbalah influenced Leibniz's philosophy.

Although Leibniz and van Helmont were both practicing alchemists and clearly interested in the lucrative aspects of the art, they were more than "projectors" in the alchemical sense. Private gain did not interest them nearly as much as the public good. As Leibniz wrote in a letter to Thomas Burnett: "You know my principles, Sir, which are to prefer the public good to all other considerations, even to glory and gold.,,49 This is perhaps what drew them most together. They were both committed to doing everything possible to improve the human condition, first and foremost by restoring religious unity and, secondly, by devising innumerable projects for all kinds of socially useful inventions. Leibniz's calculator is perhaps the best known, but he also proposed plans for such things as a high speed coach, which would run along rutted tracks on something like ball bearings, a scheme for draining water from the Hartz mines, an inland navigation system, the manufacture of porcelain, the exploitation of waste heat in furnaces, tax reform, a public health and fire service, steam-powered fountains, street lighting, a state bank, and isolation wards for plague victims. so While not quite so ingenious, van Helmont devised plans for a two-handed spinning wheel and weaving projects to employ the poor, a chair to straighten crooked backs, and new methods to teach the deaf and dumb to speak and children to write. Leibniz's similar concern with education appeared early in his career with A New Method for Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence (1667). Van Helmont also described a scheme for setting up pawn shops to help the poor, which he presented to the Royal Society,S1 and he offered proposals for reforming both the medical and the legal professions. Leibniz constantly refers to this altruistic aspect of van Helmont's character. In a letter to Thomas Burnett he emphasizes the fact that van Helmont was one of the few people he knew who practiced virtue instead of just talking about it. He admits that van Helmont may well have extraordinary opinions, but he adds, "for all that I find that he has excellent ideas about practical matters and that he would be overjoyed to contribute to the general good, in which I entirely agree ... "S2 Leibniz repeated much the same thing in a letter to Andre Morell, the numismatist and zealous disciple of Boehme and Poiret:

> In my opinion the touchstone of true illumination is a great eagerness for contributing to the general good. I find so few people who take this to heart that I am astonished. I have suggested this thousands oftimes. But I usually find that those people who wish to appear the most pious are paralyzed when it really comes to doing something good. They are content to vent themselves with fine words as if God can be earned with ceremonies. I find also that few men have a true idea of good. I only deign to give this name to someone who really tries to make men more perfect and the grandeur of God better known. I also find that those who are of a sectarian or schismatic humor, that is to say those who have separated themselves as men filled with good intentions, but who do not act reasonably in their opinions, do not know how to have charity nor illumination in its true purity. It seems to me that the late M. Labadie, the late Mlle. de Bourignon, and William Penn, with his co-religionists, had that fault of being sectarian and condemning. Among those who had extraordinary ideas, I have hardly found anyone beside M. van Helmont who shared this great principle of charity with me and who had a true eagerness for the general good, although in other respects we often had very different opinions about different matters.53
