philosophers without debating their efficacy, so that they enjoy the esteem that the most learned and pious men will grant them and,  founded on the infallible Truths of the kabbalah or divine recep- tion , embrace another , greater one, the better to illustrate and state  them" (Book IV, Chapter 6).

Herrera's system can be analyzed in three categories: I . the nature  and activity of the transcendent Cause; 2. procession, including ema- nation and creation and the Lurianic doctrine of simsum; and 3.  reversion and restoration, including the Lurianic doctrines of sebi- rah ha-kelim (the shatt ering of the vessels) and tiqqun ha-parsufim  (restoration of the faces).

1. Transcendent Cause: At the top of the order of reality is 'Ein Sof the Infinite, the One, the Good, the First Cause and the Prim e Mover. It is uncaused,  utterly simple, undivided and indivisible, self-consistent, and self- sufficient: in its utter transcendence it is hidden from human under- standing. As Herrera puts it: "a bove all unities of unions and of  individuals, and also above all improving and improved goods, there exists the pure and most simple One and the surp assing uncaused divine goodness which is 'Ein-Sof, the limitless origin al source of all things" (Book VI, Chapter 10). The conceptualization is a union of the God of the Hebrew Bible with the metaphysical und erstanding  of the absolute reality that exists abov e all individual being as devel- oped by Plato and Aristotle and their followers, culminating in the  Neoplatonism of Plotinus and Proclus and the scholastic theology of Aquinas, Durandus, Duns Scotus, and Suarez.

2. Pro cession (Gk. proodos, Heb. hitpastut) This absolute being causes everything that exists, because it is one  of its characteristics to be manifested. Its man ifestation is accom- plished by an essentially two-stage process. In the first stage , it gives  rise to an entity that is in all respects identical to it, except that it is not infinite but finite, without this implying any diminishment of its being or power, and without imputing any duality to the absolute  unity of its cause. This process is called emanation, and by it a sin- gle being emerges from the First Cause. Like its Cause, this being  is perfect and powerful, but because, unlike its Cause, it is also lim- ited, it has the ability to bring about the existence of all oth er things,  that is, the worlds of plurality, beginning with the highest, most pure and powerful incorporeal beings (the angels) and extending down to
