picture becomes more complicated. In one respect, there is a one- on-one correspondence between the three highest elements of the  Luriani c world and Plotinus's three hypostases: 'Ein-Sof is the One,  'Adam Qadmon and his sefirot and parsufim (the world of emana- tion) are Mind (Nous: the world mind or intelligible world); and the  worlds of beri 'ah , yesirah, and 'asiyah are Soul (Psuche: the anima mundi or world soul), although it is difficult not to assume that Herrera intends a furth er division by which the incorp oreal worlds correspond to Plotinus's third hypostasis (Being; to 6n), while 'asiyah corresponds to the even lower level of Nature . Herrera devotes much of his book to proving the analogies of 'Ein-Sof to the One and 'Adam Qadmon to Nous; as Altmann has shown, the third analogy  is more difficult. The explana tion that relates most directly to tri- partite Neoplatonic schemes associates beri'ah with Mind and 'Adam  Qadmon; yesirah with Soul, and the lights of the world of 'Ein-Sof; as well as 'asiyah with "the divine body," that is Being and 'asilut in general (Book VIII, Chapter 13).28 Herrera also turn s to Aristotle  toward the end of Gate ifHeaven to spell out a complex set of analo- gies between the sefirot and (among oth er things) the three causes  defined in the Physics. Like the Prim e Mover, ' Ein-Sof can be under- stood in this sense to work thro ugh H esed as effi cient cause, Din  (Geburah) as formal cause, and Raharnim (T if 'eret) as final cause (Book VIII , Chapter 16). Herrera also quotes Pico della Mirandola to suggest another arrangement in which the First Cause functions as the eminent cause of all things, the sefirot as their formal cause, and the three lower worlds as their parti cipative cause. 

3. Reversion (Gk. epistrofe, Heb. histalqut).

The final stage in the cosmic process described by Herrera's Lurianic kabbalah falls under the rubric of reversion and restoration. It accounts  for the origin of the existence of the lower world s, including imper-
