fection and evil, by the metaphor of a universal breaking or shat- tering of the perfection of divine being when it is communicated  downward, toward the realm of pure physicality. For Luria, this phe- nom enon called sebirah or shattering takes place only among the  seven lower sefirot which because of their "inferiority" are unable to retain the force of the light that originally issues from )Adam Qadmon. The first step in Herrera's explanation is the distribution of light in the formative shape of a macrocosmic man configured with the parsufim or faces (which are further anthropomorphic configurations of the sefirot) and complete with an imating soul and spirits. The shattering of these configurations can now be understood  to result in the metaphorical fall of the broken pieces of the instru- mental sefirot kelim or vessels (also called the kings that die in the  process of disintegration). These pieces are called qelippot (literally, "husks" or "shards") that are also the source of evil; they fall from the world of emanation (metaphorically speaking) into the worlds of creation, introducing disorder, disobedience, and sin. In order for the broken unity and perfection of reality to be repaired, the upper world must be conc eptually and spiritually restored to its original place in the form of compl ete parsufim. This is the process of the restoration of the faces or tiqqun ha-parsufim, which is analogous to the Neoplatonic epistrofe or return of being to its source in the  transcendent One, and is accomplished by the prayers and inten- tions of Israel. Book X provides lengthy descriptions and details of  this process, which in a sense is the culmination of kabbalistic con- templation; Herrera reconcil es it with Luria's doctrine of the spark  and the lights, of straight and circular movement, of the right and left sides and the front and back of )Adam Qadmon.

Other aspects of Herrera's kabbalah (including the doctrine of the  levels of soul and spirit, geometric metaphors, and number combi- nation) are best left to the author himself, and to comments in the  footnotes. It is appropriate to end this survey with Herrera's own warning, in Book VII , Chapter 5: "All of this is clearly understood from what we have said, and although none of the examples that have been given are entirely identical or sufficient, if we take one part that is similar [i.e. to kabbalistic teaching), leaving aside those from which it differs, and if we did the same with all, something very close to the received truth would undoubtedly emerge. At this point we should be silent, for in such hidden and sublime matters, any information, even imprecise, must be esteemed and valued."
