oft-cited discussion of an opposition between philosophies of consciousness and of the concept in twentieth-century French thought—an opposition first conceived by Cavaillès and later glossed by Elisabeth Roudinesco as Cartesians versus Spinozists—he also suggests his generation saw as its task to overcome this opposition.26 We also know that elsewhere Foucault remarked, in a fawning if no doubt jocular vein, that “perhaps one day the century will be known as Deleuzian.”27 If it was Deleuzian, its philosophical content lay in this reconciliation. This explains, too, why the Spinozism recounted in this book bears a critical relation to contemporary Spinozism. Grounded as much of it is in Deleuze’s thought, Spinozism today contains elements of the very Heideggerianism that was targeted by the Spinozists of a previous generation.28

Making this case, which goes against a prevalent notion that Deleuze is opposed to Heidegger when he is not simply indifferent to him, requires an extensive engagement with the details of Deleuze’s philosophical arguments, just as it requires attention to the care with which Spinoza’s earlier partisans developed their uses of his thought. It might be justly wondered, if Heidegger is an important condition for Deleuze’s thought, then why does he not number among the heroes of Deleuze’s counterhistory of philosophy, one that runs from Duns Scotus, via Spinoza, Hume, and Nietzsche on to Bergson? Here context is key. For even if Deleuze felt “bludgeoned to death” by the history of philosophy as an academic institution,29 the questions and concerns he brought to these unsung heroes were shaped by his quintessentially French philosophical education and the same shock wave of phenomenology that galvanized the rest of his generation. To put it bluntly, Deleuze’s counterhistory of philosophy is something of a red herring, and his own remarks about the acts of ventriloquism that informed his writings in the history of philosophy are perhaps best taken with less salt than his colorful descriptions of philosophical “buggery” might otherwise suggest. It could be that reading Deleuze in this way somehow compromises his singularity. But this seems a small price to pay to emphasize his exemplarity. By focusing on Deleuze’s metaphysics, and taking seriously his own lack of compunction in describing what he does as metaphysics, this book contributes to a growing appreciation for the substance, ambition, and depth of Deleuze’s philosophy. To be sure, the “Capitalism and Schizophrenia” project that he coauthored with Félix Guattari remains an important moment in French political thought, one that con-
