tinues to pay dividends in a variety of projects. But as Guattari becomes increasingly regarded as the main political force in the pairing, the one who gave political teeth to a metaphysical rethinking of power and desire in dispersed interpersonal terms, Deleuze is acquiring a hearing as a philosopher whose commitment to abstraction is regarded less as a liability than a source of theoretical fecundity far beyond the political fortunes of “desiring machines” and nomadic “lines of flight.”

As for Althusser, to decouple, even for heuristic purposes, his philosophical thought from his political agenda—a move that runs contrary to some of his own pronouncements on the matter—requires a sustained inquiry into his arguments if it is to be justified. If Althusser’s philosophy is irreducible to his Communist commitments, it must be demonstrably so. But such a case is plausible only in light of the renewed hearing that Althusser is receiving today. Indeed, if a reception shift is discernible in estimations of Deleuze, with Althusser the shift is even more dramatic. Multiple reasons account for this change, not least the outpouring of publications from his archive that yield a fuller picture of his intellectual project and its development. The continued importance of the work of his students and collaborators—from Badiou to Balibar—also elevates Althusser’s status. The irony is that as Althusser becomes a more historical figure, his thought becomes more relevant. It also becomes amenable to a more sober assessment, for arguably no other thinker in recent French thought has been as controversial as Althusser. First is the defining tragedy of his personal life: the murder of his wife, Hélène Legotien, during a psychotic episode in the autumn of 1980, an event that Althusser describes in harrowing detail in his memoir, The Future Lasts Forever. The second factor was his continued allegiance to the French Communist Party (PCF) at a time when its project seemed bankrupt and the deference to Soviet apologetics that his membership implied struck many as unconscionable. Adding insult to injury was the fact that just as Eastern European dissidents were invoking the language of humanism and various other themes of the “early Marx” for their cause, Althusser was targeting humanism as the philosophical enemy. Charges of Althusser’s “Stalinism” are reflective of this context for his reception in the Anglophone world, a context shaped both by a more general notion of “Western Marxism” opposed to the Leninist legacy and a dissidence movement that sought to put paid to the travesty of “really existing socialism.”30
