Historical distance has tempered this assessment of Althusser in myriad ways. It has become clear that, if hostile reactions abroad to Althusser’s antihumanism are intelligible only in light of the local vicissitudes of a more general crisis of Marxism in the 1960s and 1970s, the gestation of Althusser’s ideas on the subject are intelligible only in light of the specific and admittedly insular context in which they developed: the space of postwar French philosophy and the internecine quarrels of French party politics. Recent work has focused on the internal debates of the PCF that shaped Althusser’s interventions, and editors of Althusser’s posthumous publications have helpfully situated these writings and others in the context of various institutions of French philosophy.31 At the summit of these developments is Warren Montag’s remarkable Althusser and His Contemporaries, which has set a new standard of interpretation for Althusser’s work. Montag’s title suggests the point: Althusser makes sense and remains relevant only in light of a contextual determination of his thought, one that places it alongside other tendencies and developments in French philosophy. Althusser’s Spinozism is no exception in this regard.

As for the calamity of Althusser’s personal life, no amount of handwringing or schadenfreude would suffice to establish a relationship between this event and Althusser’s philosophy. Althusser’s lifelong struggle with manic depression is a matter of record, and the facts of the event and its aftermath, which resulted in no trial and Althusser’s being committed to a mental hospital for an extensive period, are not disputed. The analysis of Althusser’s thought in this book presumes no relation between his ideas and this tragedy, which raises the question of why it is important to bring something up only to insist that is irrelevant. First, and most basically, the endnotes did not seem an appropriate place to speak about Hélène Legotien’s death. But if the event is not relevant to the contents of Althusser’s thought, it is certainly relevant to the vagaries of its reception. Given that Althusser’s reception history is embroiled with his personal biography, in a way that is not the case, for example, with twentieth-century receptions of Spinoza, the key factors of that biography are all relevant for making sense of the initial reception and consequently for the different reception that Althusser is getting today. That he killed his wife is typically the first or second biographical fact that new readers learn about him and fades in relevance for making sense of his thought and commitment to Marxism alongside other biographical factors, for example, his upbring-
