ing in Algeria, his experiences as a foot soldier and prisoner of war, and the particulars of his position as a student and later instructor at the École Normale Supérieure.

These biographical factors are certainly germane to understanding the origins of Althusser’s political commitments and theoretical investments. But there is a difference between understanding ideas and understanding where they came from, however much the one may illuminate the other. This distinction is operative in this book and leads on to one final rationale for its method and structure, and for its focus on philosophical argument.

Like many disciplines, intellectual history thrives on internal debates about its methodology. That said, it is easily observed that methods tend to become incoherent the moment they become articulated as such. While this book has some “contextualist” elements—contextualist in the dual sense that it considers both how thinkers worked with inherited discourses and how they were responsive to institutional and political pressures (including the pressures of “academic politics”)32—the arguments it pursues are basically “internalist,” in the sense that the real drama of this history takes place in the theoretical efforts of the Spinozists in question. This means taking arguments seriously as arguments, irrespective of the ostensible purposes for which they may have been initiated or fashioned.

Not coincidentally, this kind of internalism, which insists that philosophical arguments have an integrity and transmissibility that are irreducible to their context, biographical motives, or strategic purposes, also has its own Spinozist imprimatur, for few philosophers in the canon are as ahistorical as Spinoza. Indeed, this was Hegel’s fundamental grief against Spinoza, whose most pointed injunction was to see things “under the aspect of eternity.” Writing the intellectual history of Spinozism thus results in a dilemma. The dilemma is not so much that historicizing Spinoza’s ideas necessarily betrays them, for there are many ways to historicize. One way, the one Jonathan Israel has pursued in his gargantuan history of the Radical Enlightenment, is to take Spinoza’s word as gospel and to catalogue its dissemination. Another way is to regard Spinoza’s ideas as exemplary of a recurrent challenge to orthodoxy, one that needs to be either resisted or endorsed wherever it arises.33 Still another is to treat Spinozism as a kind of floating signifier that serves as a vehicle for various ideological commitments. The more sophisticated versions of this approach—such as 
