the one Marion flirts with—ground this pliability in Spinoza’s ostensibly monistic metaphysics; if everything is in everything else, then Spinozism can mean anything—because it all means the same thing in the end.

This book takes its subjects’ philosophical engagement with Spinoza very seriously. In fact, it considers this engagement to be the substance of  the history in question. The philosophers under consideration here spent the lion’s share of their professional lives thinking, so to write the history of what they were doing is to write the history of their thinking. This requires using the available means of the historical record—correspondence, institutional data, private notes, and public performances—but it means focusing mainly on the texts in which their ideas took form and were expressed. But to take this thinking seriously also requires that it be approached sympathetically rather than skeptically or, to put it even more emphatically, enthusiastically rather than suspiciously. It means taking seriously a conviction shared by all the protagonists of this volume—that in the end philosophical arguments are regarded as persuasive not because they seem useful but because they seem right.

## .  .  . 

Here, however, we alight on the driving tension of the narrative: the desire nevertheless to derive something useful from a philosophy that seems to be correct. For with the exception of the dispute between Alquié and Gueroult, which serves as a kind of abstract distillation of the philosophical disagreement at the heart of the story, each valorization of Spinozist rationalism is accompanied by a problematic attempt to generate a politics out of this rationalism. In the case of Cavaillès, the effort to derive a politics is not his own but that of his theoretical inheritors. With Desanti, it is more properly speaking the struggle between Spinozism and phenomenology that plays a role in his shifting political convictions. Althusser’s effort has been noted, but in regard to Deleuze, suffice it to say that, prior to his collaboration with Guattari, the political implications of his arguments were by and large held in abeyance or obscurely encoded in his arguments. Taken together, what these episodes suggest is that using Spinozism to identify the troubling political consequences of phenomenology—which are deemed to be consequential to its philosophical inconsistencies— winds up producing no positive alternative of its own. The consequence of this follows in an almost syllogistic way. If Spinozism is regarded by
