these thinkers as the most compelling rationalism available, and if it generates no politics, it suggests that a compelling rationalism is not equipped to generate a politics. What it is especially well equipped to do, evidently, is to reveal the problems that result from any effort to derive a politics from a philosophy, especially but not exclusively, when that philosophy is a phenomenological ontology. Continental philosophy has been bridled for several generations by efforts to comprehend how such a gripping philosophy—Heidegger’s—could be complicit with such troubling ends. Shielding the insights of Heidegger’s thought from political instrumentalization has consequently become something of an imperative.34 Yet when it comes to Spinozism, it is evidently unnecessary to shield philosophy from its political instrumentalization; the philosophy does it for us.

This claim must seem bizarre in light of the proliferation of Spinozisms today, with their variously liberal and emancipatory inflections. It seems to be a lesson one can draw from the philosophical efforts recounted in this book all the same. To argue that Spinoza’s rationalism— his metaphysics and epistemology as they were understood in this specific context—entails no politics is not to suggest that Spinoza did not write many cogent things about politics. His political treatises are rightly acquiring the place in the history of political thought they deserve.35 But it is to suggest that Spinoza’s philosophy can be used to undermine the pretensions of any mode of political thought that seeks a metaphysical foundation—even if that metaphysics is Spinoza’s. Such a formulation no doubt tests the boundaries between the paradoxical and the obnoxious, and there is little to be gained in attempting to justify it in advance. Kant shunned Spinozism because it “leads directly to enthusiasm.” Consequently, his critique erected roadblocks to a concept of reason that “transgresses all boundaries” in search of a shortcut to the absolute. It is ironic, then, that the history of Spinozism suggests the virtues of a more circuitous route. Perhaps this is what Spinoza himself meant when, following upon scores of definitions, axioms, and digressions, he concluded his Ethics with the proposition that “beatitude is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself.”36
