the role of determinant necessity throughout existence. Against Spinoza’s rationalist conviction, rational faith in God, the source of morality, was a matter of presupposition, not demonstration. With its claims about God arranged in the manner of a geometrical proof, Spinoza’s philosophy resulted in an enthusiasm or Schwärmerei of reason to rival if not exceed the fanaticism of religious zealots.5

Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason, in name and principle, led to a decisive shift in European intellectual history, a “Copernican Revolution” in his famous phrase, whereby reason itself became the object of critique rather than the unproblematic source of metaphysical speculation or empirical inquiry. The critique of reason assumed many guises in the nineteenth century, from Marx’s historico-political approach to Darwin’s naturalism on to Nietzsche’s “transvaluation of all values.” It was only with the political catastrophes of the twentieth century, however, that the philosophical rejection of rationalism acquired a new ethical and political force. Faced with Nazism, Stalinism, and imperialism, any historical confidence in reason’s beneficent role seemed misplaced. What’s more, the critique of rationalism spanned the left and right of the political spectrum, from Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno’s Dialectic of Enlightenment to Michael Oakeshott’s Rationalism in Politics. In all cases, an overweening confidence in reason and its capacity to divine some truth about the world, or to introduce some true order into the world, seemed to verify Kant’s concerns about Spinozistic Schwärmerei and its deleterious moral and political effects.

In France, the main vehicle for the critique of reason was the reception and reworking of German phenomenology over a period of decades, from the existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre to the deconstruction of Jacques Derrida. Consequently, when France’s leading phenomenologist reiterates the critique of Spinozism in the pages of Le Monde, he evokes something more than Kant’s foundational concerns. His comments are also reflective of the manner in which Spinozism and phenomenology came to be regarded as antagonistic approaches to philosophy in France. Over the past decade, a series of major studies has established phenomenology’s crucial role in the innovations of twentieth-century French thought, placing particular emphasis on the impact of Martin Heidegger’s existential and ontological reconfiguration of Edmund Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology. Much of this history has focused on how phenomenology was re-
