fundamental springs of Husserl’s thought?”14 In a sense, this book uses “rationalism” as a term of art, although it joins others in emphasizing the extent to which structuralism as a diverse theoretical phenomenon was grounded in a more basic philosophical rationalism, the lineaments of which are beginning to come into view.15 As an investment in rationalism as an ethos—understood as a commitment to the capacity of reason, however it is conceived, to supervene on the spontaneous insights of lived experience—becomes a more clearly discernible trait of modern French thought, developing a fuller and more nuanced account of that rationalism becomes a more urgent task.

The traits that distinguish Spinozist rationalism from Cartesian rationalism are of special importance to what follows; an ongoing debate about the distinction is in fact one of the central threads of the story. For Husserl certainly did consider his phenomenology to be a new kind of rationalism, and he readily claimed Descartes’ patronage by naming the lectures in which he introduced phenomenology to a French audience the “Cartesian Meditations.” But Husserl’s choice of title also indirectly points to the significance of Spinozism. For phenomenology was quickly assimilated to a Cartesian framework in France, which meant that it became a matter of focusing on the phenomenon of subjectivity and a subject’s encounter with, or embeddedness in, the world. A Spinozist rationalism, by contrast, refused the notion of a “subject”—the cogito of Descartes’ immortal phrase “I think therefore I am” (cogito ergo sum)—as the starting point for philosophy. Ricoeur helps us specify our terms here as well in his description of Lévi-Strauss’s structuralism as a “Kantianism without a transcendental subject.”16 The demotion of the subject to a consequence of other, more fundamental forces, rather than a founding instance, is one of the unifying themes of postwar French thought, common to projects as disparate as Althusser’s Marxism and Levinas’s ethics. At issue is whether those anterior processes or forces are in principle amenable to a rational elucidation, however abstract or incomplete. A Spinozist thinks they are.

## .  .  .

The specific ways in which Spinoza’s rationalism came to be regarded as an antidote to phenomenology is the stuff of what follows. It should be noted, however, that readers seeking a comprehensive account of twentieth-century French Spinoza scholarship—there must be a few—
