1968 Spinoza is a rationalist metaphysician and epistemologist. The relevant texts of his corpus are the first two books of the Ethics, containing his foundational metaphysics of substance and his theory of the mind or soul, and his incomplete early writing, the Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, a popular text for French philosophy exams due to its incomplete nature and its status as a foil to Descartes’ Discourse on Method.

To be sure, Spinoza’s other writings begin to get a hearing largely because of the success with which Althusser and Deleuze reestablished his philosophical importance. But the tools that Althusser and Deleuze used to do this were inherited from a previous generation of thinkers who first used Spinoza’s rationalism to combat the influence of phenomenology in philosophy of science and the history of philosophy as a discipline. Beginning with the foundational work of Jean Cavaillès, the first three chapters tell the story of how and why Spinozism came to be seen as a privileged intellectual resource for demonstrating the nominally “irrationalist” tendencies of phenomenology. Specialists in early modern metaphysics may be familiar with Ferdinand Alquié and Martial Gueroult as authors of seminal works on Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, and Malebranche. And although Cavaillès is beginning to procure an intrepid readership keen to understand the role played by the philosophy of mathematics in recent French thought, his student Jean-Toussaint Desanti has garnered scarcely any attention beyond the hexagon.22 By and large, these philosophers remain unknown quantities to an Anglophone audience. Consequently, the chapters that detail the uses of Spinozism in their thought also serve as more general introductions to their ideas and projects.

The second part of the book looks at the ways that two very familiar thinkers, Althusser and Deleuze, deepened and began to develop the broader implications of this work. In this regard, their efforts form the hinge that connects the history recounted in this book with contemporary Spinozism. But their efforts were not the same effort, and the discrepancies between the transformations they wrought in Spinozism have had lasting effects.

With Althusser, we witness the ne plus ultra of a rationalist resistance to phenomenology. To be sure, Marxism serves as the terrain on which Althusser will draw his line in the sand, but the substance of his argument is consonant with variants of Spinozist rationalism developed elsewhere by Cavaillès and Gueroult. Where their concerns were, for lack 
