of a better word, academic, in Althusser’s intransigence we find a rationalist critique of any political thought grounded in phenomenology, an intransigence shaped and politicized to a degree by the negative example of Desanti, an underappreciated figure in the development of Althusser’s thought. In breaking with various precedents internal to French Marxism, Althusser’s intransigence paves the way to the theoretical exhaustion of Marxism as a positive political platform, to the extent that it offers no constructive, much less programmatic, guidance for a transformative political agenda. As an alibi for his bravura, Althusser liked to cite Lenin’s remark that when a stick has become warped, sometimes excessive force is required to straighten it out.23 I want to suggest that, in applying this force, he broke the stick. But given that the stick in question was an eschatological Marxism, the results were eminently salutary. For if it was mainly a series of historical events that steered French intellectuals away from Marxism into various “post-Marxisms,”24 it was Althusser’s theoretical project that brokered a significant reworking of Marxism among intellectuals reluctant to jettison the Marxist tradition altogether—not just theoretically but politically. In other words, if Althusser’s Marxism was a “failure,” it was a glorious one. Philosophically robust, it ushered in a variety of projects, acting as an inspiration in some cases and a provocation in others.25

With Deleuze, the story is different. Whereas Althusser endowed Spinozism with a political valence that was thoroughly negative and antiprogrammatic, Deleuze fundamentally transformed the philosophical meaning of Spinozism in the French context and, more than any other thinker, ushered in the vitalist Spinoza—the Spinoza of affect—that has become the dominant Spinoza in the humanities today. Deleuze’s place at the end of this inquiry is thus not simply a consequence of chronology. Rather, if the guiding thread of this book concerns an antagonism between Spinozism and phenomenology, the ultimate significance of Deleuze is that his metaphysics achieves a synthesis—a disjunctive synthesis, in his vernacular—that finally brings these strands together. Indeed, Deleuze’s philosophical project in the 1960s, which culminates in his major work Difference and Repetition, is precisely to develop a post-Heideggerian rationalism that does not simply evade Heidegger’s critique of metaphysics but accounts for Heidegger’s ontology in turn. The resultant system purports to describe a scenario that is more fundamental than Heidegger’s fundamental ontology, the “groundless ground” of Spinozan Substance. In Foucault’s 
